The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gospel of John for Readers, by Lightheart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Gospel of John for Readers

Author: Lightheart

Posting Date: August 21, 2012 [EBook #5656]
Release Date: May, 2004
First Posted: August 4, 2002
Last Updated: August 31, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF JOHN FOR READERS ***














Copyright (C) 2002 by Lightheart.



The Gospel of John for Readers



Editor's Preface

"We must know before we can love. In order to know God, we must often
think of Him. And when we come to love Him, we shall then also think
of Him often, for our heart will be with our treasure " ... Brother
Lawrence's The Practice of the Presence of God.

The way to know God is by reading the gospels. Gospel is interpreted
Good News - God's good news to His world. It is the new testament and
perspective we must have in order to know and love Him as He means us
to know and love Him.

The gospel of John is called the gospel of love. And, indeed, it
is a love story, written by that disciple whose heart was totally
surrendered. Brother Lawrence, whose heart was also totally surrendered,
was a great believer in doing what was most practical, simple, and direct.

The Gospel of John for Readers is the KJV lovingly and faithfully adapted
to a flowing narrative style to allow for easy reading enjoyment. May it
help us all to see the exquisite beauty and simple yet practical message
of God's good news through eyes of love.

in His gentle service, Lightheart PracticeGodsPresence.com August 2002



The Gospel of John

1.        In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were
made by Him. Without Him was not any thing made that was made. In Him was
life; and the life was the light of men. The light shineth in darkness;
and the darkness comprehended it not.

There was a man sent from God whose name was John. He came to bear
witness of the Light that all men through Him might believe. John was
not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. That was
the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He
was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him
not. He came unto His own, and His own received Him not. But as many as
received Him, to them He gave power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe on His name: those who were born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And the Word
was made flesh and dwelt among us. And we beheld His glory, the glory
as of the only begotten son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

John bore witness of Him and cried, saying, This was He of whom I
spoke. He that cometh after me is preferred before me because He was
before me. We have all received of His fullness, grace for grace. For
the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. No
man hath seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, hath declared Him.

And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites
from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? And he confessed and did
not deny. He confessed, I am not the Christ. And they asked him, What
then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And
he answered, No. Then said they unto him, Who art thou that we may give
an answer to them that sent us? What sayest thou of thyself? He said,
I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way
of the Lord, as was said by the prophet Esaias. And they who were sent
by the Pharisees asked him, Why baptizest thou then if thou be not that
Christ nor Elias nor that prophet?

John answered them, saying, I baptize with water but there standeth One
among you, whom ye know not. He it is, who, coming after me, is preferred
before me and whose foot straps I am not worthy to unloose. These things
were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan where John was baptizing. When
John saw Jesus coming toward him, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God who
taketh away the sin of the world. This is He of whom I said, After me
cometh a man which is preferred before me because He was before me. I
knew Him not except that He should be made manifest to Israel. Therefore
I come baptizing with water. John bore record saying, I saw the Spirit
descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon Him. I knew Him
not except that He who sent me to baptize with water said to me, Upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on Him, this is
He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. I saw Him, and bare record that
this is the Son of God.

The next day John and two of his disciples saw Jesus as He walked. John
said, Behold the Lamb of God! The two disciples heard John speak and
followed Jesus. Jesus turned, saw them following, and saith unto them,
What seek ye? They said to Him, Rabbi, (which is interpreted, Master)
where dwellest Thou? He saith unto them, Come and see. They came and saw
where He dwelt and abode with Him that day. It was about the tenth hour.

One of the two which heard John speak and followed Jesus was Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother. First he findeth his own brother, Simon, and saith
to him, We have found the messias, (which is interpreted, the Christ) and
he brought him to Jesus. When Jesus beheld him He said, Thou art Simon the
son of Jona. Thou shalt be called Cephas (which is interpreted, a stone).

A day later, Jesus went forth into Galilee and findeth Philip and saith
unto him, Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and
Peter. Philip findeth Nathanael and saith unto him, We have found Him
of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth,
the son of Joseph. And Nathanael said unto him, Can any good thing come
out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him and saith of him, Behold an Israelite in
whom is no guile! Nathanael saith unto Him, Whence knowest Thou me? Jesus
answered and said unto him, Before Philip called thee, when thou wast
under the fig tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and saith unto Him,
Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God. Thou art the King of Israel.

Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee I saw thee
under the fig tree believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than
these. And He saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter
ye shall see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the Son of man.

2.        Three days later there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. The
mother of Jesus was there. And both Jesus and His disciples were called
to the marriage. And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith
unto Him, They have no wine. Jesus saith unto her, But what am I to
do? Mine hour is not yet come. His mother saith unto the servants,
Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it.

Now there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of
the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus
saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. They filled them up to
the brim. Then He saith unto them, Draw out now, and carry them unto
the governor of the feast.

When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine and
knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew)
the governor of the feast called the bridegroom. He saith unto him,
Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine, and, when men have
well drunk, then that which is worse, but thou hast kept the good wine
until now! This beginning of miracles Jesus did in Cana of Galilee. He
showed forth His glory and His disciples believed on Him.

After this He went down to Capernaum, He, His mother, His brethren,
and His disciples. They continued there for a few days. The passover was
at hand. Jesus went up to Jerusalem and found in the temple those that
sold oxen and sheep and doves and changers of money sitting. And when He
had made a scourge of small cords, He drove them all out of the temple
and overthrew the tables. He said unto them that sold doves, Take these
things hence. Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise. Here
His disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house
hath eaten me up.

Then answered the Jews and said unto Him, What sign showest Thou unto us,
seeing that Thou doest these things? Jesus answered and said unto them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Then said the
Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt Thou raise
it up again in three days? But He spoke of the temple of His body. When,
therefore, He was risen from the dead, His disciples remembered that
He had said this to them and they believed the scripture and the word
which Jesus had said.

When He was in Jerusalem at the passover feast day, many believed in
His name when they saw the miracles which He did. But Jesus did not
commit Himself.

3.        There was a man named Nicodemus, a Pharisee and a ruler of the
Jews. He came to Jesus by night and said unto Him, Rabbi, we know that
Thou art a teacher come from God because no man can do these miracles
that Thou doest unless God be with Him. Jesus answered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again he cannot
see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto Him, How can a man be born
when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb and
be born?

Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That
which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is born of the Spirit
is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The
wind bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the sound but cannot
tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth. The same is as I have said
of the Spirit.

Nicodemus answered and said unto Him, How can these things be? Jesus
answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel and knowest not
these things? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak what we know,
testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have
told you earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I
tell you of heavenly things?

No man hath ascended up to heaven except He that came down from heaven,
the Son of man. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness even
so must the Son of man be lifted up so that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish but have eternal life. For God so loved the world
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not His Son
into the world to condemn the world but that the world, through Him,
might be saved. He that believeth on Him is not condemned. But he that
believeth not is condemned already because he hath not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God.

This is the condemnation: light is come into the world and men loved
darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil. Every one that
doeth evil hateth the light and cometh not to the light lest his deeds
should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light that
his deeds may be shown that they are wrought in God.

After these things Jesus and His disciples went into the land of
Judaea. There He tarried with them and baptized. And John also was
baptizing in Aenon near to Salim because there was much water there, so
many people came and were baptized. For John was not yet cast into prison.

A question arose between some of John's disciples and the Jews about
purifying. They went to John and said, Rabbi, He that was with thee
beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, He baptizeth and
all men come to Him.

John answered and said, A man can receive nothing unless it be given
him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me witness that I said I am not
the Christ but that I am sent before Him. He that hath the bride is the
bridegroom, but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth
Him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This my joy
therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease.

He that cometh from above is above all. He that is of the earth is
earthly and speaketh of the earth. He that cometh from heaven is above
all. All that He hath seen and heard He testifieth and no one receiveth
His testimony. He that hath received His testimony hath set to his seal
that God is true. For He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God
because God giveth unto Him the Spirit without limit. The Father loveth
the Son and hath given all things into His hand. He that believeth on
the Son hath everlasting life. He that believeth not on the Son shall
not see life but the wrath of God abideth on him.

4.        When the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made
and baptized more disciples than John, (Though Jesus Himself baptized not,
but His disciples) He left Judaea and departed again into Galilee. He
needed to go through Samaria. There He came to a city of Samaria called
Sychar, which is near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son
Joseph. Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus, therefore, being wearied with
His journey, sat down on the well. It was about the sixth hour. There
cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saith unto her, Give me
to drink. (For His disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)

She said unto Him, How is it that Thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me,
a woman of Samaria? The Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans? Jesus
answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it
is that saith to thee Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him
and He would have given thee living water.

The woman saith unto Him, Sir, Thou hast nothing to draw with and the
well is deep. From whence hast Thou that living water? Art Thou greater
than our father Jacob who gave us the well and drank thereof himself,
and his children, and his cattle?

Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall
thirst again. But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give
him shall never thirst. The water that I give him shall be a well of
water springing up in him into everlasting life. The woman saith unto
Him, Sir, give me this water that I thirst not and never have to come
hither to draw it. Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband and come
hither. The woman answered and said, I have no husband.

Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband for thou
hast had five husbands. He whom thou now hast is not thy husband. In
that saidst thou truly. The woman saith unto Him, Sir, I perceive that
Thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain and ye say
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.

Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh when ye shall,
neither worship the Father in this mountain nor at Jerusalem. Ye worship
ye know not what. We know what we worship because salvation is of the
Jews. But the hour cometh, and is now, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth because the Father seeketh
such to worship Him. God is a Spirit. They that worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth. The woman saith unto Him, I know that a
messias cometh which is called Christ. When He is come He will tell
us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am He. At
this time His disciples came and they marvelled that He talked with the
woman. Yet no man said, What seekest Thou? or, Why talkest Thou with her?

The woman then left her waterpot and went her way. In the city she saith
to the men, Come, see a man which told me all the things that I ever
did. Is not this the Christ? Then they went out of the city and came
unto Him.

In the meanwhile His disciples prayed Him, saying, Master, eat. But
He said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. Therefore
said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought Him ought to
eat? Jesus saith unto them, my meat is to do the will of Him that sent me
and to complete His work. Say not ye, There are yet four months and then
cometh harvest? Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes and look on
the fields. They are all ready to harvest. He that reapeth now receiveth
wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal so that both he that soweth
and he that reapeth may rejoice together. And herein is that saying true,
One soweth and another reapeth. I sent you to reap where ye bestowed no
labour. Other men laboured and ye are entered into their labours.

And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on Him for the saying
of the woman who testified, He told me all that ever I did. So when
the Samaritans were come unto Him, they besought Him to tarry with
them. And He abode there two days. Many more believed because of His
own word. They said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy
saying but because we have heard Him ourselves and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.

Now after two days He departed from there and went into Galilee. Jesus
Himself testified that a prophet hath no honour in his own country. When
He come into Galilee, the Galilaeans received Him after having seen all
the things that He did at Jerusalem at the feast because they also were
at the feast. So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee where He turned
the water into wine.

Now there was a certain nobleman at Capernaum, whose son was sick. When
he heard that Jesus left Judea and was in Galilee, he went to Him and
besought Him to come down and heal his son who was near death. Then said
Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe. The
nobleman saith unto Him, Sir, come before my child dies.

Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way. Thy son liveth. The man believed the
word that Jesus had spoken unto him and he went his way. As he was going
along his servants met him saying, Thy son liveth. Then inquired he of
them the hour when the son began to mend. They said, Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him. So the father knew that it was at the
same hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son liveth. And he believed,
and his whole house believed. This is the second miracle that Jesus did
when He was come out of Judaea into Galilee.

5.        After this there was a feast of the Jews. Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. At Jerusalem, by the sheep market, there is a pool with five
porches and, in Hebrew, is called Bethesda. On these porches lay a great
multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, who wait for the
moving of the water. For, at a certain season, an angel went down into
the pool and stirred the water. Whoever first stepped in was made whole
of whatsoever disease he had.

A certain man was there which had an infirmity thirty and eight
years. When Jesus saw him and knew that he had been such a long time in
that condition, He saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The impotent
man answered, Sir, I have no man, when the water is stirred, to put
me into the pool. Before I come another steppeth down before me. Jesus
saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed and walk. Immediately the man was
made whole, took up his bed, and walked. This was on the sabbath day.

The Jews therefore said to him that was cured, It is the sabbath day. It
is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He answered them, He that made
me whole said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk. Then asked they him,
What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed and walk? And he
that was healed knew not who it was because Jesus had conveyed Himself
away from the multitude gathered in that place.

Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple and said unto him, Behold,
thou art made whole. Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee. The
man departed and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him
whole. Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus. They sought to slay Him
because He had done these things on the sabbath day. But Jesus answered
them, my Father worketh hitherto, and I work.

Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Him because He not only had
broken the sabbath but He said also that God was His Father, making
Himself equal with God. Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of Himself except what He
seeth the Father do, for what things soever He doeth, these also doeth
the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the Son and showeth Him all things
that He Himself doeth. And He will show Him greater works than these that
ye may marvel. For as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them,
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will. For the Father judgeth no man,
but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. This is so all men should
honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not
the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent Him.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word and believeth
on Him that sent me hath everlasting life and shall not come into
condemnation but pass from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, The hour is coming, and is now, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God. They that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in
Himself so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself. And He hath
given Him authority to execute judgment also because He is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this because the hour is coming in which all that are in
graves shall hear His voice and shall come forth. They that have done
good go unto the resurrection of life. They that have done evil go unto
the resurrection of damnation. I can of myself do nothing. As I hear,
I judge. And my judgment is just because I seek not my own will but the
will of the Father who hath sent me.

If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. There is another that
beareth witness of me; and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of
me is true. Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. But
I receive not testimony from man. I say these things that ye might be
saved. He was a burning and a shining light and ye were willing, for a
season, to rejoice in his light. But I have greater witness than that of
John, for the works which the Father hath given me to complete are the
same works that I do. Witness that the Father hath sent me. The Father
Himself which hath sent me hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither
heard His voice at any time nor seen His shape. Ye have not His word
abiding in you because whom He hath sent ye believe not.

Search the scriptures. In them ye think ye have eternal life. They are
that which testify of me. Yet ye will not come to me that ye might have
life. I receive not honour from men but I know you that have not the love
of God in you. I am come in my Father's name and ye receive me not. If
another shall come in his own name him ye will receive. How can ye believe
when ye receive honour one of another and seek not the honour that cometh
only from God? Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. There
is already one that accuseth you: Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye
believed Moses ye would have believed me because he wrote of me. But if
ye believe not his writings how shall ye believe my words?

6.        After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which
is the sea of Tiberias. And a great multitude followed Him because they
saw the miracles which He did on those who were diseased. Jesus went
up into a mountain and there He sat with His disciples. The passover,
a feast of the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus saw a great company come unto
Him, He saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may
eat? This He said to test Philip because Jesus Himself knew what He
would do. Philip answered Him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for every one to take a little. One of His disciples, Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother, saith unto Him, There is a lad here, who has five
barley loaves and two small fishes. But what are they among so many?

And Jesus said, Have the men sit down on the grass. So the men, about
five thousand, sat down. Then Jesus took the loaves. When He had given
thanks, He distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples to them
that were seated. Then the same with the fishes. When all were filled,
He said unto His disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain so that
nothing be wasted. Therefore they gathered them together and filled twelve
baskets with the leftover fragments of the five barley loaves. Those who,
when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is truly that
prophet that should come into the world. When Jesus perceived that they
would come and take Him by force to make Him a king, He departed alone
into a mountain.

It was now evening. His disciples went down to the sea and entered into
a boat and went toward Capernaum. It grew dark and Jesus had not come to
them. Then the sea arose by the force of a great wind. When they had rowed
about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they saw Jesus walking on the
sea and drawing near the boat. They were afraid. But He saith unto them,
It is I. Be not afraid. Then they willingly received Him into the boat
and immediately were at the land whither they went.

The day following, the people who stood on the other side of the sea
saw that there was no other boat there, except the one His disciples
entered. And they saw that Jesus went not with His disciples but that His
disciples left alone. (Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh
unto the place where they ate bread after the Lord had given thanks.) When
the people saw that Jesus was not there, nor His disciples, they took
boats to Capernaum to look for Him.

Now when they found Jesus on the other side of the sea, they said unto
Him, Rabbi, when camest Thou hither? Jesus answered them and said, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye ate of the loaves and were filled. Labour not for the meat
which perisheth but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life. It
is what the Son of man shall give you for God the Father hath sealed Him.

Then said they unto Him, What shall we do that we might work the works
of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that
ye believe on Him whom He hath sent. And they said, What sign showest
Thou, then, that we may see and believe Thee? What dost Thou work? Our
fathers ate manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread
from heaven to eat.

Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave
you not that bread from heaven. My Father giveth you the true bread from
heaven. For the bread of God is He which cometh down from heaven and
giveth life unto the world. Then said they unto Him, Lord, evermore give
us this bread. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life. He that
cometh to me shall never hunger. And he that believeth on me shall never
thirst. But I also said to you that ye have seen me and believe not. All
that the Father giveth me shall come to me. And him that cometh to me I
will not cast out because I came down from heaven not to do my own will,
but the will of Him that sent me.

This is the Father's will that hath sent me, that of all which He hath
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
day. And this is the will of Him that sent me, that every one which
seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may have everlasting life. And I
will raise him up at the last day.

The Jews then murmured at Him because He said, I am the bread which came
down from heaven. And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph,
whose father and mother we know? How is it then that He saith, I came
down from heaven? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur
not among yourselves. No man can come to me except that the Father which
hath sent me draw him to me. And I will raise him up at the last day. It
is written in the prophets that they shall be all taught of God. Every
man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh
unto me. No man hath seen the Father except He which is of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting
life. I am that bread of life. Your fathers ate manna in the wilderness
and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man
may eat, thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. And the bread
that I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.

The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give
us His flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood,
ye have no life in you. Whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood
hath eternal life. I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. The living Father hath
sent me and I live by the Father. Therefore, he that eateth me shall
also live by me. This is that bread which came down from heaven. Not
the manna your fathers ate. He that eateth of this bread shall live for
ever. These things said He in the synagogue as He taught in Capernaum.

When they heard this, many of His disciples said, This is a hard
saying. Who can hear it? Jesus knew that His disciples murmured at it
and said, Doth this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of man
ascend up where He was before? It is the spirit that quickeneth. The flesh
profiteth nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and
they are life. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus
knew from the beginning who they were that believed not and who would
betray Him. And He said, Therefore I said unto you that no man can come
unto me except it were given of my Father. From that time many of His
followers went back and walked with Him no more.

Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? Simon Peter
answered Him, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal
life. We believe and are sure that Thou art that Christ, the Son of
the living God. Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve and
one of you is a devil? He spoke of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon,
for he it was, of that twelve, that should betray Him.

7.        After these things Jesus walked in Galilee. He would not
walk in Jewry because the Jews sought to kill Him. Now the Jews' feast
of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren, therefore, said unto Him,
Depart hence. Go into Judaea that Thy disciples also may see the works
that Thou doest. For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret,
and He Himself seeketh to be known openly. If Thou do these things show
Thyself to the world. For neither did His own brethren believe in Him.

Then Jesus said unto them, my time is not yet come but your time is always
ready. The world cannot hate you but me it hateth because I testify that
the works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast. I go not up yet
for my time is not yet fully come.

When He had said these words unto them He remained in Galilee. But when
His brethren were gone up, then went He also to the feast, not openly,
but in secret. The Jews sought Him at the feast and said, Where is
He? There was much murmuring among the people concerning Him. Some said,
He is a good man. Others said, Nay; He deceiveth the people. However,
no man spoke openly of Him for fear of the Jews.

Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and
taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters
having never learned? Jesus answered them and said, My doctrine is not
mine but His that sent me. If any man will do His will he shall know
whether the doctrine be of God or whether I speak of myself. He that
speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory. He that seeketh His glory
that sent Him, no unrighteousness is in Him.

Did not Moses give you the law and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why
go ye about to kill me? The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil
who goeth about to kill Thee? Jesus answered and said unto them, I have
done one work and ye all marvel. Moses gave unto you circumcision (not
because it is of Moses, but of the fathers) and ye circumcise a man on
the sabbath day. If a man receives circumcision on the sabbath day that
the law of Moses should not be broken, are ye angry at me because I have
made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day? Judge not according to
the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Some of them said, Is not this He whom they seek to kill? But, lo, He
speaketh boldly and they say nothing to Him. Do the rulers know indeed
that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know this man whence He is but
when Christ cometh no man knoweth whence He is. Then cried Jesus in the
temple as He taught saying, Ye both know me and know whence I am. I am
not come of myself but He that sent me is true, whom ye know not. But
I know Him for I am from Him and He hath sent me.

Then they sought to take Him but no man laid hands on Him because His
hour was not yet come. Many of the people believed on Him and said, When
Christ cometh will He do more miracles than these which this man hath
done? The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning
Him. And the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take Him.

Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while am I with you and then I go unto
Him that sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me. And where I
go ye cannot come. Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will He
go that we shall not find Him? Will He go unto the dispersed among the
Gentiles and teach the Gentiles? What manner of saying is this that He
said, Ye shall seek me and shall not find me? And, where I am, thither
ye cannot come?

In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let Him come unto me and drink. He that
believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. (But this spoke He of the Spirit which they that
believe on Him would receive. The Holy Ghost was not yet given because
Jesus was not yet glorified.) Many of the people therefore, when they
heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. Others said,
This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath
not the scripture said that Christ cometh of the seed of David and out
of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? So there was a division
among the people because of Him. Some of them would have taken Him,
but no man laid hands on Him.

Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees. They said unto
them, Why have ye not brought Him? The officers answered, Never man spoke
like this man. Then answered the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? Have
any of the rulers or any of the Pharisees believed on Him? These people
who knoweth not the law are cursed. Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that
came to Jesus by night, being one of them,) Doth our law judge any man
before it hear him and know what he doeth? They answered and said to
him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search and look, for, out of Galilee,
ariseth no prophet. And every man went unto his own house.

8.        Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives. Early in the morning He
came again into the temple and all the people came unto Him. He sat down
and taught them. Now the scribes and Pharisees brought to Him a woman
taken in adultery. When they sat her in the midst, they say unto Him,
Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. Moses, in
the law, commanded us that such should be stoned. What sayest Thou? This
they said, tempting Him, that they might have reason to accuse Him. But
Jesus stooped down and, with His finger, wrote on the ground as if He
heard them not. So when they continued asking Him, He lifted Himself up
and said to them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast
a stone at her. Then He stooped down again and wrote on the ground.

Those who heard this, being convicted by their own conscience, went out
one by one, beginning with the eldest and down to the last. Now Jesus
was left alone and the woman was standing in the midst. When Jesus lifted
Himself up and saw none but the woman, He said unto her, Woman, where are
thine accusers? Hath no man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And
Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee. Go and sin no more.

Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world. He
that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. The Pharisees said unto Him, Thou bearest record of Thyself. Thy
record is not true. Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear
record of myself, yet my record is true because I know whence I came,
and whither I go. But ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go. Ye
judge after the flesh. I judge no man. And yet, if I judge, my judgment
is true because I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me are one.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I
am one that beareth witness of myself. The Father that sent me also
beareth witness of me. Then said they unto Him, Where is Thy Father? Jesus
answered, Ye neither know me nor my Father. If ye had known me ye should
have known my Father also. Jesus spoke these words in the treasury as
He taught in the temple. No man laid hands on Him becuase His hour was
not yet come.

Jesus said unto them, I go my way. Ye shall seek me and shall die in
your sins. Whither I go, ye cannot come. Then said the Jews, Will He kill
Himself because He saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come? And He said unto
them, Ye are from beneath. I am from above. Ye are of this world. I am
not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your
sins because if ye believe not that I am He, ye shall die in your sins.

Then said they unto Him, Who art Thou? And Jesus saith. The same that I
said to you from the beginning. I have many things to say and to judge
of you. But He that sent me is true. I speak to the world those things
which I have heard from Him. They understood not that He spoke to them
of the Father. Then said Jesus, When ye have lifted up the Son of man
then shall ye know that I am He. I do nothing of myself. As my Father
hath taught me I speak these things. He that sent me is with me. The
Father hath not left me alone because I do always those things that
please Him. As He spoke these words many believed Him.

Jesus said to those Jews which believed on Him, If ye continue in my word,
then are ye my disciples indeed. Ye shall know the truth and the truth
shall make you free. They answered Him, We are Abraham's seed and were
never in bondage to any man. How sayest Thou, Ye shall be made free? Jesus
answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin
is the servant of sin. The servant abideth not in the house forever, but
the Son doth abide forever. If the Son, therefore, shall make you free,
ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek
to kill me because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I
have seen with my Father; and ye do that which ye have seen with your
father. They answered and said unto Him, Abraham is our father.

Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's children ye would do the works
of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth
which I have heard of God. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they
to Him, We were not born of fornication; we have one Father, God. Jesus
said unto them, If God were your Father ye would love me for I proceeded
forth and came from God. I came not of myself, but of Him who sent me. Why
do ye not understand my speech? Is it because ye cannot hear my word?

Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will
do. He was a murderer from the beginning. He dealt not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of
his own because he is a liar, and the father of all lies. Yet, I tell you
the truth and ye believe me not. Which of you convinceth me of sin? And
if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth
God's words. Ye, therefore, hear them not because ye are not of God.

The Jews said, Are we not right that Thou art a Samaritan and hast a
devil? Jesus answered, I have not a devil. I honour my Father and ye
dishonour me. I seek not my own glory. There is One that seeketh and
judgeth. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying he
shall never see death. Then said the Jews, Now we know that Thou hast a
devil. Abraham is dead, and so are the prophets. Thou sayest, If a man
keep my saying he shall never taste of death. Art Thou greater than our
father Abraham and the prophets who are dead? Who makest Thou Thyself?

Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing. It is my
Father, whom you say is your God, that honoureth me. Yet ye have not
known Him. But I know Him and, if I should say I know Him not, I shall
be a liar like unto you. But I know Him and keep His saying. Your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw and was glad for it. Then said
the Jews unto Him, Thou art not yet fifty years old and hast Thou seen
Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before
Abraham was, I am. Then they took up stones to cast at Him. But Jesus
hid Himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them,
and so passed by.

9.        Jesus passed by a man who was blind from birth. His disciples
asked Him, Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born
blind? Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents;
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. I must work
the works of Him that sent me while it is day. The night cometh when
no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the
world. When He had thus spoken, He spat on the ground, and made clay of
the spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,
and said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which means Sent).

He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing. The neighbours and
they who before had seen he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and
begged? Some said, This is he. Others said, He is like him. But he said,
I am he. Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened? He
answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed
my eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash. I went
and washed and I received my sight. Then they said to him, Where is
He? And he said, I know not. They brought him to the Pharisees. It was
also the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes. Then,
once again, the Pharisees asked him how he had received his sight. He
said unto them, He put clay upon my eyes, and I washed and do see.

Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God because He
keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner
do such miracles? And there was a division among them. Then they said
to the blind man again, what sayest thou of He that hath opened thine
eyes? He said, He is a prophet. But the Jews did not believe that he had
been blind and received his sight until they called his parents. And they
asked them, Is this your son who ye say was born blind? How then doth he
see? His parents answered them, We know that this is our son and that
he was born blind, but by what means he now seeth, we know not. Or who
hath opened his eyes, we know not. He is of age. Ask him. He shall speak
for himself. These words spoke his parents because they feared the Jews,
for the Jews had agreed that, if any man said that He was the Christ,
that man should be put out of the synagogue. Therefore said his parents,
Our son is of age; ask him.

They called the man that was blind once again, and said unto him, Give
God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner. He answered and said,
Whether He be a sinner I know not. One thing I know, that, whereas I
was blind, now I see. Then said they to him again, What did He do to
thee? How opened He thine eyes? He answered them, I have told you already
and ye did not hear. Wherefore would ye hear it again? Will ye also be
His disciples? Then they reviled him and said, Thou art His disciple;
but we are Moses' disciples. We know that God spoke to Moses. As for
this one, we know not from whence He comes.

The man answered and said unto them, Why here is a marvellous thing, that
ye know not from whence He is come, and yet He hath opened my eyes. Now we
know that God heareth not sinners. But if any man be a worshipper of God,
and doeth His will, him He heareth. Since the world began was it ever
heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind? If this
man were not of God He could do nothing. They answered and said unto him,
Thou wast born in sin. Dost thou dare teach us? And they cast him out.

Jesus heard that they had cast him out. When He found him He said unto
him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, Who is
He, Lord, that I might believe on Him? And Jesus said unto him, Thou
hast both seen Him and it is He that talketh with thee. And he said,
Lord, I believe. And he worshipped Him. Then Jesus said, For judgment
I am come into this world that they which see not might see; and they
which see might be made blind. Some of the Pharisees who were with Him
heard these words and said unto Him, Are we blind also? Jesus said unto
them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see;
therefore your sin remaineth.

10.        Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that entereth not by the
door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way is a thief and
a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the
sheep. To him the porter openeth. The sheep hear his voice. He calleth
his own sheep by name and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth
his own sheep, he goeth before them and the sheep follow because they
know his voice. A stranger they will not follow. Instead, they will flee
because they know not the voice of strangers.

This parable spoke Jesus unto them. Yet they understood not what things
He spoke about. Then Jesus said again, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves and
robbers, but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door. If any man enter
in by me he shall be saved, and shall go in and out and find pasture. The
thief cometh not except to steal and kill and destroy. I am come that
they might have life and that they might have it more abundantly.

I am the Good Shepherd. The good shepherd giveth His life for the
sheep. But he that is a hireling and not the shepherd, whose sheep are
not his own, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees. The
wolf catcheth and scattereth the sheep. The hireling flees because he
is a hireling and careth not for the sheep. I am the Good Shepherd. I
know my sheep and am known by my sheep. The Father knoweth me, even as
I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep. Other sheep I have
also who are not of this fold. Them also I must bring and they shall
hear my voice. There shall be One Fold and One Shepherd. Therefore doth
my Father love me because I lay down my life that I might take it up
again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down myself. I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. This commandment
have I received of my Father. There was a division therefore among the
Jews for these sayings. Many of them said, He hath a devil and is mad;
why hear ye Him? Others said, These are not the words of Him that hath
a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

In Jerusalem it was winter and the feast of the dedication. Jesus walked
in the temple upon Solomon's porch. Then the Jews surrounded Him and
said, How long dost Thou make us doubt? If Thou be the Christ, tell us
plainly. Jesus answered them, I told you and ye believed me not. The
works that I do in my Father's name bear witness of me. But ye believe
not because ye are not of my sheep. As I said to you, My sheep hear
my voice and I know them and they follow me. And I give them eternal
life. They shall never perish, nor shall any man pluck them out of my
hand. My Father, who gave them to me, is greater than all. No man is able
to pluck them out of my Father's hand. I and my Father are one. Then the
Jews took up stones to stone Him. Jesus answered them, Many good works
have I showed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?

The Jews answered Him, saying, For a good work we stone Thee not; but for
blasphemy; and because that Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God. Jesus
answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said Ye are gods? If
He called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture
cannot be broken; Say ye of Him whom the Father hath sanctified and
sent into the world, thou blasphemest because I said I am the Son of
God? If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the works that ye may know and believe
that the Father is in me, and I in Him.

Therefore they sought again to take Him but He escaped out of their
hand and went away again beyond Jordan to the place where John at first
baptized. There He abode. And many resorted unto Him, and said, John
did no miracle but all things that John spoke of this man were true. And
many believed on Him there.

11.        Now a certain man was sick. His name was Lazarus of
Bethany. His sisters sent word to Jesus, saying, Lord, behold, he whom
Thou lovest is sick. When Jesus heard this, He said, This sickness is not
unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might thereby
be glorified. Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. However,
He remained two more days in the same place where He was. Then saith
He to His disciples, Let us go into Judaea. His disciples say unto Him,
Master, the Jews have sought to stone Thee. Goest Thou there again? Jesus
answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the
day, he stumbleth not because he seeth the light of this world. But if
a man walk in the night, he stumbleth because there is no light in him.

After that He saith to them, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth but I go, that I
may awake him out of sleep. Then said His disciples, Lord, if he sleeps,
he shall do well. However, Jesus spoke of death but they thought that He
had spoken of taking rest in sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly,
Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the
extent ye may believe. Let us go unto him. Then Thomas, called Didymus,
said to his fellow disciples, Let us also go that we may die with Him.

When Jesus came, He found that Lazarus had already lain in the grave
four days. Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off,
and many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them concerning
their brother. Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went
and met Him but Mary remained in the house. Then said Martha unto Jesus,
Lord, if Thou hadst been here my brother would not have died. But I
know, that even now, whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God, God will give it
Thee. Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. Martha saith
unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last
day. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life. He that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever
liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this? She saith
unto Him, Yes, Lord. I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God,
which should come into the world. And when she had so said, she went and
called Mary, her sister, saying, The Master is come and calleth for thee.

As soon as she heard that, she arose quickly and came unto Him. Now
Jesus was not yet come into the town but was in that place where Martha
met Him. Some Jews that were with her in the house to comfort her, saw
Mary hastily rise up and go out. They followed her, saying, She goeth
unto the grave to weep there. Then, when Mary came where Jesus was
and saw Him, she fell down at His feet saying unto Him, Lord, if Thou
hadst been here my brother had not died. When Jesus saw her weeping,
and those who came with her also weeping, He groaned in the spirit and
was troubled. He said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord,
come and see. Jesus wept.

Then said the Jews, Behold how He loved him! And some of them said,
Could not He who opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that this man
should not have died? Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh
to the grave. It was a cave and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said, Take ye
away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto Him,
Lord, by this time he stinketh for he hath been dead four days. Jesus
saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe,
thou shouldest see the glory of God? Then they took away the stone from
the place where the dead was laid.

And Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said, Father, I thank Thee that
Thou hast heard me. And I know that Thou hearest me always. Because of
these standing by I say it that they may believe that Thou hast sent
me. And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,
come forth. Now he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot with
graveclothes and his face was wound about with a napkin. Jesus saith
unto them, Loose him, and let him go.

Many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on Him. But some of them went to the Pharisees and
told them what things Jesus had done. Then the chief priests and the
Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What do we for this man doeth
many miracles? If we let Him thus alone, all men will believe on Him
and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation. And
one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said
unto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient
for us that one man should die for the people so the whole nation perish
not. And this spoke he not of himself, but being high priest that year,
he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation, and not for that
nation only, but that also He should gather together in one the children
of God that were scattered abroad. Then from that day forth they took
counsel together to put Him to death.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews but went unto
a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and
there continued with His disciples. Now the Jews' passover was near at
hand. Many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover in
order to purify themselves. Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among
themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that He will
not come to the feast? The chief priests and the Pharisees had given
a commandment, that, if any man knew where He was, he should show it,
that they might take Him.

12.        Six days before the passover, Jesus came to Bethany where He
had raised Lazarus from the dead. There they made Him a supper. Martha
served. Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with Him. Then Mary
took a pound of very costly ointment of spikenard and anointed the feet
of Jesus and wiped His feet with her hair. The house was filled with
the fragrance of the ointment. Then saith one of His disciples, Judas
Iscariot, Simon's son, who would betray Him, Why was not this ointment
sold for its great worth and given to the poor? This he said not that
he cared for the poor but because he was a thief, and held the bag, and
minded what was put therein. Jesus said, Let her alone. Against the day
of my burying hath she kept this. For the poor always ye have with you;
but me ye have not always.

Many of the Jews knew that He was there. But they came not for Jesus'
sake only, but that they might also see Lazarus whom He had raised from
the dead. The chief priests consulted that they might also put Lazarus to
death because he was the reason many of the Jews went away and believed
on Jesus.

On the next day many people who had come for the feast heard that Jesus
was coming to Jerusalem. They took branches of palm trees, went forth to
meet Him, and cried, Hosanna! Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh
in the name of the Lord. And Jesus, when He had found a young colt,
sat thereon; for it is written, Fear not, daughter of Sion. Behold,
thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's colt. These things His disciples
did not at first understand. But when Jesus was glorified, then they
remembered that these things were written of Him, and that they had
done these things unto Him. The people that were with Him when He called
Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bore record. For
this reason also the people met Him because they heard He had done this
miracle. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how
ye prevail not? Behold, the world is gone after Him.

There were certain Greeks among these that came to worship at the
feast. Some of them went to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee,
and asked him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth
Andrew. Then Andrew and Philip told Jesus. Jesus answered them, saying,
The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily,
I say unto you, unless a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die,
it abideth alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit. He that
loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world
shall keep it unto life eternal.

If any man serve me, let him follow me. Where I am, there also shall my
servant be. If any man serve me, him will my Father honour. Now my soul
is troubled. But what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour? Yet
for this reason came I unto this hour. Father, glorify Thy name. Then
there came a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and
will glorify it again.

The people that stood by and heard it said that it thundered. Others
said, an angel spoke to Him. Jesus answered and said, This voice came not
because of me, but for your sake. Now is the judgment of this world. Now
shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This He said, signifying what
death He should die.

The people answered Him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth
for ever. How sayest Thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this
Son of man? Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light
with you. Walk while ye have the light lest darkness come upon you. For
he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have
light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.

These things Jesus spoke and then departed and hid Himself. Even though He
had done many miracles before them, they still did not believe Him. Thus
it was that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, Lord,
who hath believed our report? And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been
revealed? Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias also said, He
hath blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts that they should not
see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart and be converted,
and I should heal them. These things said Esaias, when he saw His glory
and spoke of Him.

Nevertheless among the chief rulers many believed on Him. But because
of the Pharisees they did not confess Him lest they should be put out
of the synagogue. They loved the praise of men more than the praise of
God. Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me,
but on Him that sent me. And he that seeth me seeth Him that sent me. I
am come as a light into the world that whosoever believeth on me should
not abide in darkness. If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge
him not because I came not to judge the world but to save the world. He
that rejects me and receives not my words, hath One that judgeth him. He
Whose words I have spoken shall judge him in the last day. For I have not
spoken of myself, but of the Father who sent me. He gave me a commandment
of what I should say and what I should speak. I know that His commandment
is life everlasting. Whatever I speak I speak as the Father said unto me.

13.        It was before the feast of the passover. Jesus knew that
His hour was come and that He should depart out of this world unto the
Father. Having loved His own who were in the world, He loved them unto
the end. Supper was ended. The devil now put it into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray Him. Jesus knew that the Father had
given all things into His hands and that He came from God, and went to
God. He arose from supper, laid aside His garments, took a towel, and
girded Himself. After that He poureth water into a basin and began to
wash the disciples' feet. He then wiped them with the towel wherewith
He was girded.

When He came to Simon Peter, he saith unto Him, Lord, dost Thou wash my
feet? Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now;
but thou shalt know hereafter. Peter saith unto Him, Thou shalt never
wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not then thou hast no
part with me. Simon Peter then saith unto Him, Lord, not my feet only but
also my hands and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth
not wash more than his feet, for he is clean every whit. Ye are clean. But
not all are clean. He said this last for He knew who should betray Him.

After He washed their feet, put on His garments, and sat down again,
He said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master
and Lord. And ye say well for so I am. If I, then, your Lord and Master,
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I
have given you an example that ye should do as I have done to you. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. Neither
He that is sent greater than He that sent Him. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them.

I speak not of all of you. I know whom I have chosen. But that the
scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up
his heel against me. Now I tell you before it comes so when it is come
to pass, ye may believe that I am He. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me. He that receiveth me
receiveth Him that sent me.

When Jesus had thus said, He was troubled in spirit and testified saying,
Verily, verily, I say unto you that one of you shall betray me. Then the
disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom He spoke. Now there
was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of His disciples, whom Jesus loved. Simon
Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of
whom He spoke. He, then, lying on Jesus' breast, saith unto Him, Lord,
who is it? Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a sop when I
have dipped it. When He had dipped the sop He gave it to Judas Iscariot,
the son of Simon. And, after the sop, Satan entered into him. Then said
Jesus to him, What thou doest, do quickly.

No man at the table knew for what intent He said this to him. Some of
them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus said unto him, Buy
those things that we have need of for the feast, or that he should give
something to the poor. He then, having received the sop, went immediately
out. It was night. After he was gone, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in Him. If God be glorified in Him, God
shall also glorify Him in Himself. Little children, yet a little while I
am with you. Ye shall seek me and, as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go,
ye cannot come. So now I give you a new commandment. Love one another as
I have loved you. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples,
if ye have love one for another.

Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, whither goest Thou? Jesus answered
him, Whither I go thou cannot follow me now, but thou shalt follow me
afterwards. Peter said unto Him, Lord, why cannot I follow Thee now? I
will lay down my life for Thy sake. Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay
down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Thou shall
deny me thrice before the cock crows.

14.        Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God. Believe
in me also. In my Father's house are many mansions. If it were not so
I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto myself
so that where I am, there ye may be also. And whither I go ye know,
and the way ye know. Thomas saith unto Him, Lord, we know not whither
Thou goest. How can we know the way? Jesus saith unto him, I am the way,
the truth, and the life. No man cometh unto the Father but by me. If ye
had known me, ye should have known my Father also, and from now on ye
know Him and have seen Him.

Philip saith unto Him, Lord, show us the Father and it sufficeth us. Jesus
saith, Have I been so long a time with you and still thou hast not known
me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the Father. How sayest thou
then, Show us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father and
the Father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of myself
but of the Father that dwelleth in me. He doeth the works. Believe me
that I am in the Father and the Father in me, or else believe me for the
very works' sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on
me shall also do the works that I do. And greater works than these shall
he also do. Whatever ye ask in my name I will do, so that the Father may
be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in my name I will do
it. If ye love me, keep my commandments.

I will ask the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter to abide
with you forever. This Spirit of truth the world cannot receive because it
seeth Him not and will not know Him. But ye know Him for He dwelleth with
you and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless. I will come to
you. In a little while the world seeth me no more. But ye shall see me
because I live and ye live also. At that day ye shall know that I am in
my Father, ye are in me, and I am in you. He that hath my commandments
and keepeth them loveth me. And he that loveth me shall be loved of my
Father. I will love him and show myself to him.

Judas, not Iscariot, saith unto Him, Lord, how is it that Thou wilt
manifest Thyself unto us and not to the world? Jesus answered and said, If
a man love me, he will keep my words and my Father will love him. We will
come unto him and make Our abode with him. He that loveth me not keepeth
not my sayings. The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who
sent me. These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you.

The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, shall teach you all things. He will bring all things I have said to
you to your remembrance. Peace I leave with you. My peace I give unto you,
not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled,
neither let it be afraid. Ye have heard how I said to you, I go away, and
come again unto you. If ye loved me ye would rejoice because I said I go
unto the Father, for my Father is greater than I. And now I have told you
beforehand so that, when it comes to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter
I will not talk much with you, for the prince of this world cometh. He
hath nothing on me but what I do I do so the world may know that I love
the Father, and do as the Father commanded me. Arise, let us go hence.

15.        I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every
branch in me that beareth not fruit He taketh away. Every branch that
beareth fruit, He purgeth that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye
are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me,
and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it abide
in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the vine. Ye are
the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth
much fruit for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me he
is a branch that is cut off and will wither. Men gather them and cast them
into the fire to be burned. If ye abide in me and my words abide in you,
ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit and so shall ye be my disciples.

As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you. Continue in my love. If
ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love as I have kept my
Father's commandments and abide in His love. These things have I spoken
unto you that my joy might remain in you and that your joy might be full.

This is my commandment, That ye love one another as I have loved
you. Greater love hath no man than that he lay down his life for his
friends. Ye are my friends. If ye do whatever I command you, I call
you not servants. The servant knoweth not what his lord doeth. But I
have called you friends for all things that I have heard of my Father I
have made known unto you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,
and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain so whatever ye shall ask of the Father in my name,
He may give it you.

These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate
you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the
world, the world would love his own. But ye are not of the world. I have
chosen you out of the world. Therefore the world hateth you. Remember the
word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept
my saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do
unto you for my name's sake, because they know not Him that sent me.

If I had not come and spoken unto them, they would be innocent of sin. But
now they have no cloke to hide their sin. He that hateth me hateth my
Father also. If I had not done among them the works which no other man
did, they had not had sin. But now they have seen and hated both me and
my Father. But this cometh to pass so that the word might be fulfilled
that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause. But when
the Comforter comes, the Spirit of truth who proceedeth from the Father,
He shall testify of me. And ye also shall bear witness because ye have
been with me from the beginning.

16.       These things have I spoken unto you that ye should not be
offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues. Yea, the time will
come when whoever killeth you will think that he doeth God a service. And
these things will they do unto you because they have not known the Father
nor me.

But these things have I told you so that when the time comes, ye may
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you
at the beginning because I was with you. But now I go away to Him that
sent me. And none of you asketh me, Whither goest Thou? But because I
have said these things unto you sorrow hath filled your heart.

Nevertheless I tell you the truth, It is best for you that I go away. If
I go not away the Comforter will not come to you. But if I depart, I will
send Him to you. When He is come, He will reprove the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on
me. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father and ye see me no more. Of
judgment, because the evil one who is prince of this world is judged.

I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. However, when the Spirit of truth is come, He will guide you into all
truth because He shall not speak of Himself. But whatsoever He shall hear,
that shall He speak. And He will show you things to come. He shall glorify
me for He shall receive my own, and shall show it unto you. All things
that the Father hath are mine. Therefore I said that He shall take my own
and shall show it unto you. A little while and ye shall not see me. And
then, in a little while, and ye shall see me because I go to the Father.

Then said some of His disciples among themselves, What is this that
He saith unto us? A little while and ye shall not see me? And in a
little while and ye shall see me because I go to the Father? They said
therefore, What is this that He saith, A little while? we cannot tell
what He saith. Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask Him, and
said unto them, Do ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little
while, and ye shall not see me, and in a little while, ye shall see me?

Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice. Ye shall be sorrowful but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow because her hour is
come. But as soon as she is delivered of the child she remembereth no more
the anguish because of her joy over a new birth to the world. So ye now
have sorrow. But I will see you again. And your heart shall rejoice. And
your joy no man can take from you. In that day ye shall need ask of
me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name he will give it to you. Until now ye have asked
nothing in my name. Ask. And ye shall receive so your joy may be full.

These things I have spoken unto you in proverbs. But the time cometh when
I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs but I shall show you plainly
of the Father. At that day ye shall ask in my name. And I say not unto
you, that I will pray the Father for you. For the Father Himself loveth
you because ye have loved me and have believed that I came from God. I
came forth from the Father and am come into the world. Now I leave the
world and go to the Father.

His disciples said unto Him, Lo, now speakest Thou plainly and speakest
no proverb. Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour
cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to
his own. Ye shall leave me alone and, yet, I am not alone because the
Father is with me. These things I have spoken unto you so that in me ye
might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation. But be of good
cheer. I have overcome the world.

17.        These words spoke Jesus. Then He lifted up His eyes to heaven
and said, Father, the hour is come. Glorify Thy Son that Thy Son also
may glorify Thee, as Thou hast given Him power over all flesh that He
should give eternal life to as many as Thou hast given Him. This is life
eternal, that they might know Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ,
whom Thou hast sent. I have glorified Thee on the earth. I have finished
the work which Thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify Thou
me with Thine Own Self with the glory which I had with Thee before the
world was. I have manifested Thy name unto the men which Thou gavest
me out of the world. Thine they were and Thou gavest them me. They have
kept Thy word. Now they know that all things Thou hast given me are of
Thee. For I have given unto them the words which Thou gavest me. They
have received them and know surely that I came from Thee, and they have
believed that Thou didst send me.

I pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for them which Thou
hast given me because they are Thine. All mine are Thine, and Thine are
mine. And I am glorified in them. Now I am no more in the world but these
are in the world. I come to Thee, Holy Father. Keep through Thine Own Name
those whom Thou hast given me so they may be one just as We are one. While
I was with them in the world I kept them in Thy Name. Those that Thou
gavest me I have kept. None of them is lost except the son of perdition
that the scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to Thee and speak these
things in the world that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

I have given them Thy word. The world hath hated them because they
are not of the world as I am not of the world. I pray not that Thou
shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them
from evil. They are not of the world as I am not of the world. Sanctify
them through Thy Truth. Thy Word is Truth. As Thou hast sent me into
the world so have I also sent them into the world. And for their sakes
I sanctify myself that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

Neither pray I for these alone. But I pray also for them which shall
believe on me through their word that they all may be One, as Thou,
Father, art in me, and I in Thee. They also may be One in Us so that
the world may believe that Thou hast sent me. And the glory which Thou
gavest me I have given them so that they may be One, even as We are
One. I in them and Thou in me, that they may be made perfect in One,
and that the world may know that Thou hast sent me, and hast loved them
as Thou hast loved me.

Father, I will that they also, whom Thou hast given me, be with me where
I am. May they behold my glory, which Thou hast given me for Thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the world. O righteous Father, the world hath
not known Thee. But I have known Thee, and these have known that Thou
hast sent me. And I have declared unto them Thy Name, and will declare it
that the love wherewith Thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them.

18.       When Jesus had spoken these words, He went forth with His
disciples over the brook Cedron where He entered into a garden with
His disciples. Judas, who betrayed Him, also knew the place for Jesus
ofttimes resorted thither with His disciples. Judas then, having been
given a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees,
cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons. Jesus therefore,
knowing all things that should come upon Him, went forth, and said unto
them, Whom seek ye? They answered Him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith
unto them, I am He. And Judas also, which betrayed Him, stood with
them. As soon as Jesus said I am He, they were stunned.

Then He asked them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of
Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am He. If therefore ye
seek me, let these go their way. This He said so that the saying might be
fulfilled, which He spoke, Of them which Thou gavest me I have lost none.

Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, smote the high priest's
servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus. Jesus
immediately said to Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath. The cup
which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Then the band and
the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus, bound Him, and took Him
to Annas first, for he was father in law to Caiaphas, the high priest
that year. Now it was Caiaphas who gave counsel to the Jews that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people.

Simon Peter followed Jesus and so did another disciple who was known to
the high priest and who went into the palace of the high priest with
Jesus. But Peter stood outisde the door. Then the other disciple came
out, spoke unto her that kept the door, and brought Peter inside. She,
who kept the door saith unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's
disciples? He saith, I am not. He stood by the fire along with both
officers and servants who were warming themselves in the cold night.

The high priest then asked Jesus of His disciples, and of His
doctrine. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world. I taught in the
synagogue, and in the temple whither the Jews always resort. In secret I
have said nothing. Why askest thou me? Ask them which heard me what I have
said unto them? Behold, they know what I said. When He had thus spoken,
one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his
hand, saying, Why answerest Thou the high priest so? Jesus answered him,
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil. But if well, why smitest
thou me? Then Annas had Him sent bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.

As Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. they said unto him, Art not
thou also one of His disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not. One
of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter
cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with Him? Peter then
denied again. Immediately the cock crowed.

Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment. It was early
and they themselves went not into the judgment hall lest they should be
defiled and might not eat the passover. Pilate then went out unto them
and said, What accusation bring ye against this man? They answered and
said unto him, If He were not a malefactor we would not have delivered
Him up unto thee. Then Pilate said unto them, Take Him and judge Him
according to your law. The Jews said to him, It is not lawful for us
to put any man to death. This accorded with the saying of Jesus when He
spoke of what death He should die.

Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto Him, Art Thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered him, Sayest thou
this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate answered,
Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered
Thee unto me. What hast Thou done? Jesus answered, My kingdom is not
of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would
fight so I would not be delivered to the Jews. But my kingdom is not
from hence. Pilate therefore said unto Him, Art Thou a king then? Jesus
answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice. Pilate saith unto
Him, What is truth? After he had said this, he went out again unto the
Jews, and saith to them, I find in Him no fault at all. But ye have a
custom that I should release someone unto you at the passover. Will ye,
therefore, that I release unto you the King of the Jews? Then cried they
all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

19.       Then Pilate took Jesus and had Him scourged. The soldiers
platted a crown of thorns and put it on His head. And they put on Him a
purple robe and said, Hail, King of the Jews! They smote Him with their
hands. Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith, Behold, I bring Him
forth to you that ye may know that I find no fault in Him. Then came
Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate
saith unto them, Behold the man!

When the chief priests and officers saw Him they cried out, Crucify
Him. Crucify Him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye Him and crucify Him
but I find no fault in Him. The Jews answered him, We have a law and,
by our law, He ought to die because He made Himself the Son of God. When
Pilate heard that saying he was the more afraid. He went again into
the judgment hall and saith unto Jesus, Whence art Thou? But Jesus
gave him no answer. Then saith Pilate unto Him, Speakest Thou not
unto me? Knowest Thou not that I have power to crucify Thee or release
Thee? Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against me except
it were given thee from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto thee
hath the greater sin. Thenceforth Pilate sought to release Him but the
Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's
friend. Whoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.

When Pilate therefore heard that saying he brought Jesus forth and sat
down in the judgment seat in a place called the Pavement, and in the
Hebrew, Gabbatha. It was the preparation of the passover and about the
sixth hour. He saith unto the Jews, Behold your King! But they cried
out, Away with Him. Away with Him. Crucify Him. Pilate saith unto them,
Shall I crucify your King? The chief priest answered, We have no king
but Caesar. Then he delivered Him unto them to be crucified. And they
took Jesus and led Him away.

Bearing His cross He went forth into a place called the place of a skull,
in the Hebrew, Golgotha. Here they crucified Him and two others. One
on either side and Jesus in the midst. Pilate wrote a title and put
it on the cross. The writing was, 'Jesus of Nazareth The King Of The
Jews'. This title was then read by many of the Jews for the place where
Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city and the title written in Hebrew,
and Greek, and Latin. Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate,
Write not The King of the Jews but write that He said, I am King of the
Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.

When they had put Jesus upon the cross the soldiers took His garments
and made four parts. Each soldier took a part. But His coat was without
seam and woven from the top throughout. They said to eachother, Let
us not rend it but cast lots for whose it shall be. Thus the scripture
was fulfilled which saith, They parted my raiment among them and for my
vesture they did cast lots.

There stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister,
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus saw His
mother and the disciple whom He loved standing by, He saith unto His
mother, Woman, behold thy son! Then saith He to the disciple, Behold
thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

After this, Jesus, knowing that all things were now accomplished, and
so that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Now there was
set a vessel full of vinegar. They filled a sponge and put it upon hyssop
and put it to His mouth. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar,
He bowed His head and said, It is finished.

During the preparation for the sabbath, a high day, it was not fit that
the bodies should remain upon the cross. The Jews besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away. Then came
the soldiers who broke the legs of the first and then of the other who
was crucified with Him. But when they came to Jesus and saw that He
was already dead, they broke not His legs. Instead, one of the soldiers
pierced His side with a spear and from His side came blood and water. He
that saw it bore record, and his record is true. He knoweth that he
saith truth that ye might believe. These things were done that this
scripture should be fulfilled: A bone of Him shall not be broken. And
another scripture saith, They shall look on Him whom they pierced.

After this, Joseph of Arimathaea, who, for fear of the Jews, was a secret
disciple of Jesus, besought Pilate that he might take Jesus' body. Pilate
gave him leave. With him came Nicodemus, who at the first came to Jesus
by night. He brought a mixture of about a hundred pounds worth of myrrh
and aloes. They took the body of Jesus, wound it in linen clothes, and
prepared it with the spices as the custom was of the Jews for burial. In
the place where He was crucified there was a garden. And in the garden
was a new sepulchre wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus.

20.        On the first day of the week, when it was yet dark, Mary
Magdalene came early unto the sepulchre. She saw that the stone had been
taken away from the entrance. Then she ran and met Simon Peter and the
other disciple whom Jesus loved. She saith unto them, They have taken
away the Lord out of the sepulchre and we know not where they have
laid Him. Peter and the other disciple, therefore, started toward the
sepulchre. They began running together. But the other disciple, having
outrun Peter, arrived at the entrance first. Stooping down and looking
in, he saw the linen clothes lying there but he did not go in.

Then came Simon Peter who went into the sepulchre, seeth the linen clothes
and the napkin that was about His head. The napkin was not lying with the
linen clothes, but was folded separately and in a place by itself. Then
the other disciple went in also, and he saw, and believed. As yet they
knew not the scripture, that He must rise again from the dead. The
disciples then returned to their own home.

But Mary stood outside at the entrance weeping. As she wept, she stooped
down, looked into the sepulchre, and saw two angels in white sitting,
one at the head and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had
lain. They said to her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them,
Because they have taken away my Lord and I know not where they have laid
Him. After she had thus said, she turned and saw Jesus standing, and knew
not that it was Jesus. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? Whom
seekest thou? She, supposing Him to be the gardener, saith unto Him, Sir,
if Thou have borne Him hence, tell me where Thou hast laid Him and I will
take Him away. Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned and saith unto Him,
Rabboni; which is to say, Master. Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not for I
am not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brethren and say unto them,
I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.

Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord,
and that He had spoken these things unto her. Then the same day at
evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut
where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and
stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. And when He
had so said, He shewed unto them His hands and His side. Then were the
disciples glad, when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them again,
Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. When
He had said this, He breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive
ye the Holy Ghost. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them;
and whose sins ye retain, they are retained.

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen
the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in His hands the
print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
thrust my hand into His side, I will not believe. Eight days passed
and His disciples were within and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus,
the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto
you. Then saith He to Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side. Now be
not faithless but believing. Thomas answered and said unto Him, my Lord
and my God. Jesus saith, Thomas, because thou hast seen me thou hast
believed. Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed.

And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of His disciples
which are not written in this book. But these are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and, that believing,
ye might have life through His Name.

21.        After these things Jesus showed Himself again to the
disciples. It was at the sea of Tiberias. Gathered together were Simon
Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of
Zebedee, and two other of His disciples. Simon Peter saith unto them,
I go a fishing. They say to him, We also go with thee. They went forth
and immediately got into a fishing boat. That night they caught nothing.

When the morning came, Jesus stood on the shore. The disciples knew
not that it was Jesus. Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye
anything? They answered Him, No. And He said unto them, Cast the net
on the right side of the boat and ye shall find some. They, therefore,
cast the net. Now they were not able to draw it up for the multitude of
fishes in the net. Then the disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter,
It is the Lord.

When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he drew up his fisher's coat
around him and cast himself into the sea. The other disciples came in the
boat dragging the net with the fishes. They were only about two hundred
cubits from the shore. As soon as they reached the shore, they saw a
fire of coals there, and fish already laid thereon. And there was also
bread. Jesus saith to them, Bring the fish which ye have caught. Simon
Peter went over and drew in the net. It was full of great fishes, one
hundred and fifty three. Yet, even though there were so many, the net was
not broken. Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. None of the disciples
durst ask Him, Who art Thou? knowing that it was the Lord. Jesus then
came, and served them bread and fish also. This is now the third time
that Jesus showed Himself to His disciples.

After they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas,
lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord. Thou knowest
that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs. Then He saith to him
a second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto Him,
Yea, Lord. Thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my
sheep. He saith unto him yet a third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest
thou me? Peter was grieved because He said to him a third time, Lovest
thou me? He said unto Him, Lord, Thou knowest all things. Thou knowest
that I love Thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself and walkedst
whither thou wouldest. But when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch
forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not go. This spoke He, signifying by what death Peter should
glorify God. When He had spoken this, He saith unto him, Follow me.

Then Peter turned and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following
them. This was the disciple who leaned on Jesus breast at supper, and
also asked, Lord, who is he that betrayeth thee? Peter, now seeing him,
saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him,
If I will that he tarry till I come what is that to thee? You follow
me. Then the saying spread among the brethren that that disciple should
not die. Yet Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die but, if I will
that he tarry till I come what business is that to thee?

This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these
things, and we know that his testimony is true. There are also many other
things that Jesus did which, if they were all told, I suppose that even
the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.


08-2002 Lightheart PracticeGodsPresence.com









End of Project Gutenberg's The Gospel of John for Readers, by Lightheart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF JOHN FOR READERS ***

***** This file should be named 5656.txt or 5656.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/5/5656/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
