The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Latter-Day Prophet, by George Q. Cannon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Latter-Day Prophet
       History of Joseph Smith Written for Young People

Author: George Q. Cannon

Release Date: March 7, 2018 [EBook #56698]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LATTER-DAY PROPHET ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Renah
Holmes.








THE LATTER-DAY PROPHET


HISTORY OF

JOSEPH SMITH


WRITTEN FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

BY GEORGE Q. CANNON


PUBLISHED AT
JUVENILE INSTRUCTOR OFFICE
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH
1900



PREFACE.

In sending out this little work, the author hopes with all his heart
that he has made interesting and instructive a subject that has been a
source of inspiration to him. The book was called forth mainly by the
need of the Sunday Schools for such a publication. In many schools the
author's _Life of Joseph Smith_ is being used, but that book was not
written as a text-book for children. This little volume can be put to
such a use, and can be placed in the hands of the children themselves.
Teachers may gather new material to give them from any source they
desire, but the children have a foundation furnished here.

In this book there may be words that a child of ten or twelve years
will not understand; but the child's vocabulary would never grow if
he met no new words. However the author believes there are few if any
places where an intelligent child cannot gather the meaning from the
context. The work is purposely arranged in forty chapters, as that is
the number of Sundays, fast-days excluded, in the year; but if possible,
a little time once a month should be given to review work. Special
attention is called to the chapter headings, which may be used as the
topics on which different members of the class may prepare to talk. The
maps and illustrations will be found valuable in aiding the child's
understanding. While these suggestions apply to the use of this volume
as a text-book, it has also been the aim to have the history suitable
for general reading as well.

It has been the author's desire through life to aid in giving the young
Latter-day Saints so much that is good and pure in literature that they
will have no excuse for reading that which is trashy or improper. Good
books, if not the strongest outside influence, are at least very strong
in the building of character. The story of life upon the earth is
beautiful and has absorbing interest if that life is natural, that is,
in harmony with the will of our Father in Heaven. The real experiences
of a bold missionary of Truth should be and are of the highest interest
to all right-minded Mormon children of either sex. Hence the author
has seen fit to regard this little work as the beginning of a series
of biographies of the Presidents of the Church, which he has under
contemplation. He believes that the data of the history of the Church
can be given as completely in the lives of the men who have led it as
in any other way. There are some additional advantages: a biography
has greater unity and consequently children can grasp it better; they
obtain a deeper understanding, too, of the Church and its principles,
when they see the life-history and growth of a man under the influence
of the Gospel; and they become intimately acquainted with the noblest
characters that have ever lived upon the earth. Besides this, the
history of the Church is divided into periods that correspond with the
time that each man has been President. Each may almost be considered
an epoch. The Church was organized and its members grew to be a strong
people in the life of Joseph Smith; they became pioneers and colonizers
in the life of Brigham Young; John Taylor's presidency was marked by
the dark struggles which threatened the very existence of the Church
itself. Wilford Woodruff's by the wonderful progress of the Saints
when given liberty. Lorenzo Snow's already promises to mark a new and
eventful period.

THE LATTER-DAY PROPHET is now sent forth, with the fervent prayer that
it may create in the hearts of the children of Zion a greater love for
the man who made of human life a thing so nearly divine, and help them
to go bravely forward with the work he was chosen to begin.

                                                      THE AUTHOR.



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

Birthplace of the Prophet Joseph Smith--His Ancestors--Removal to New
York State--A Religious Revival

CHAPTER II.

Joseph Inclined to Think Seriously upon Religion--Undecided as to which
Church to Join--Gets Light from the Bible--His First Prayer--Answered
by a Glorious Vision

CHAPTER III.

How the Account of his Vision was Received--His Further Inquiry for
Light--Another Vision

CHAPTER IV.

The Morning Vision--Joseph Tells his Father--Visits Cumorah--The Plates
Found--Moroni's Command

CHAPTER V.

The Four Years of Waiting--Joseph Works in Pennsylvania--Marriage--The
Last Visit to the Hill--Outruns the Robbers

CHAPTER VI.

Persecution--Martin Harris Comes to Joseph's Aid--Anthon Fulfills a
Prophecy--Martin becomes Scribe--Strange Book-Writers

CHAPTER VII.

Martin Harris Impatient--The Manuscript Lost--God's Wisdom
Shown--Joseph Repents--Slow Progress of Translation

CHAPTER VIII.

Oliver Cowdery Becomes Scribe--Joseph and Oliver Pray for New
Light--The Priesthood Restored--The First Baptisms--Kindness of Joseph
Knight

CHAPTER IX.

David Whitmer Takes the Prophet to Fayette--Many Believe and are
Baptized--Eleven Witnesses See the Plates and Bear Record--The Higher
Priesthood Restored--The Translation Finished

CHAPTER X.

The Church Organized--Joseph Accepted as Leader--The Holy Ghost
Conferred--Joseph Casts the Devil from Newel Knight--The First
Conference

CHAPTER XI.

Baptisms at Colesville--Joseph Arrested--Davidson and Reid on the
Defense--Suffering Like the Master--Narrow Escape from Mods

CHAPTER XII.

Fighting the Evil One--The Mob Blinded--President Alone to Receive
Revelation for the Church--First Missionary Movement--Working in the
West

CHAPTER XIII.

The Westward Move Begins--Kirtland--The High Priesthood
Conferred--Joseph Goes to Missouri--Zion Dedicated

CHAPTER XIV.

The Two Stakes--Joseph Lives at Hiram--McLellin Tries to Write a
Revelation and Fails--The Apostate Booth Stirs up Hatred--Joseph
Tarred and Feathered

CHAPTER XV.

The Visit to Missouri--Joseph Poisoned--Brigham Young and Heber C.
Kimball come to Kirtland--Prophecy of Civil War--First Presidency
Organized

CHAPTER XVI.

Trouble Begins in Missouri--The Elders Pray, the Mob Gets Drunk--July
Mob Destroys Printing Office and Tar and Feather the Brethren--The
Saints Promise to Leave--Appeal to Governor

CHAPTER XVII.

The Missouri Saints Hire Lawyers and the Mob Forms--Night Attack on Big
Blue Branch--Two Days of Cruelty and Plunder--The Battle--Saints Give
up Arms

CHAPTER XVIII.

New Struggle of Old War--Mob Turned loose on Saints--The Terrible
Driving--Appeals to Dunklin and Jackson--Mob and Saints Hold Conference

CHAPTER XIX.

Foundation of the Kirtland Temple Laid--Joseph Goes on Mission to
Canada--First High Council Formed--Zion's Camp Gathered--Wilford
Woodruff a Member

CHAPTER XX.

Zion's Camp on the Way--Miracle of Bringing Forth Water--Zelph, the
White Lamanite--Rebellion in the Camp--Stop for the Night on Fishing
River--Campbell's Threat--The Mob Aroused

CHAPTER XXI.

The Terrible Tempest on Fishing River--Visit of Col. Sconce--Cholera in
Camp--Joseph Smitten--Sidney Gilbert's Death--Prophet Visits Zion

CHAPTER XXII.

A Time of Peace Begins--Building the Temple at Kirtland--The Twelve
Apostles Chosen--First Quorum of Seventy Organized--Joseph Translates
Pearl of Great Price--William Smith's Sin

CHAPTER XXIII.

The Prophet's Growth in Knowledge--Glorious Visions in
the Temple--Dedication--Keys of this Dispensation Conferred--Elders go
out to Preach

CHAPTER XXIV.

The Saints in Clay County--Citizens Ask them to Leave--Caldwell County
Formed--John Taylor--Lorenzo Snow--Willard Richards

CHAPTER XXV.

The Spirit of Speculation--Kirtland Safety Society Begins and
Fails--Many Apostatize--The English Mission Opened--Satan Strikes Heber
C. Kimball, but Fails to Stop the Work

CHAPTER XXVI.

Joseph Visits Canada--Carries Sidney Through Swamps to Escape Mob--Men
Fall from High Places--Prophet Escapes to Missouri--David Whitmer and
Oliver Cowdery Cut off the Church

CHAPTER XXVII.

The Last Missouri Persecution Begins--Fifteen Brave Men Defeat One
Hundred and Fifty Cowards--Penniston and Black Swear Falsehoods--Joseph
and Lyman Wight Put Under Bonds--Mob Gathers

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Mob Attacks De Witt--Joseph Tries in Vain to Save the
Town--Mob Driven Away from Adam-ondi-Ahman--Apostle Patten Killed in
Battle of Crooked River--Extermination Begins at Haun's Mill--Alma
Smith's Wound and his Mother's Faith

CHAPTER XXIX.

Hinkle Betrays Joseph and Brethren to Mob-Militia--Court-Martial
Orders them to be Shot--Soldiers Sack Far West--Joseph Preaches in
Independence--Brethren taken to Richmond for Trial--Clark Finishes
Terrible Work at Far West and Adam-ondi-Ahman--Mock Trial and
Imprisonment

CHAPTER XXX.

Petition the Legislature for Justice--John Taylor and John E. Page
Ordained Apostles--Preparations to Leave Missouri--Treatment of Joseph
and his Fellow-Prisoners--Illinois the next Gathering Place of the
Saints

CHAPTER XXXI.

Prisoners in Liberty Jail Seek their Liberty--Taken to Gallatin for
Trial--Ordered to be Taken to Boone County--Their Escape from the
Guards--Conference at Far West--A Prophecy Fulfilled--Last of the
Saints Leave Missouri

CHAPTER XXXII.

Saints Locate at Commerce, Afterwards called Nauvoo--An Unhealthy
Place--A Day of Miraculous Healings--Apostles set out upon Missions to
England--Their Labors in that Land

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Joseph and Companions Depart for the National Capital--The
Prophet's act of Heroism--Visits President Van Buren--The Latter's
Cowardice--Apostle Hyde's Mission to Jerusalem--Boggs' Demand for
the Prophet and his Brethren--Death of the Prophet's Father--Nauvoo
Chartered as a City--Nauvoo University and Legion

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Carlin sends out the old Order for Arrest--Joseph Nurses the
Sheriff--The Trial--Don Carlos Smith Dies--Visit from Sac and Fox
Indians--Baptism for Dead Begun--First Relief Society Organized

CHAPTER XXXV.

Bennett's Plots to Destroy the Prophet--A Prophecy--Joseph Charged with
Being an Accessory to the Attempted Assassination of Boggs--His Arrest
and Trial--Set at Liberty

CHAPTER XXXVI.

A Bloody War Predicted--The Prophet's Interview with Stephen A.
Douglas--A Prophecy--The Celestial Order of Marriage--Joseph Kidnapped
and Abused--He Entertains the men who sought to take his Life

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Prophet a Model of Perfect Manhood--Apostasy of Men who had been
his Friends--Christmas Day--The Prophet a Candidate for the Presidency
of the United States--Prediction Concerning the Saints--The Work of his
Enemies

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

The Plot of an Apostate--The Publication of the Nauvoo
"Expositor"--Declared a Nuisance and Abated as such--Joseph's Last
Public Speech--He and his Brother Hyrum leave Nauvoo--Return to the
City--"I am Going Like a Lamb to the Slaughter"

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Under the Governor's Pledge of Protection Joseph and His Brethren go
to Carthage--Arrested and Imprisoned--Occurrences at Carthage--Plot to
Murder the Prophet--Governor Ford's Cowardice and Treachery

CHAPTER XL.

The Prisoners in Carthage Jail--Surrounded by a Mob with
Painted Faces--The Martyrdom--The Return to Nauvoo--Funeral and
Burial--Conclusion



THE LATTER-DAY PROPHET.

YOUNG PEOPLE'S

HISTORY OF JOSEPH SMITH.



CHAPTER I.

1805-20.

BIRTHPLACE OF THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH--HIS ANCESTOR--REMOVAL TO NEW
YORK STATE--A RELIGIOUS REVIVAL.

It was two days before Christmas in the year eighteen hundred and five,
and cold winter had already set in. The Green Mountains of Vermont were
white with the snow that had fallen, and now it lay also in the valleys
and upon the level land. It was the season when men celebrate the birth
of our Savior, and they felt in their hearts the gladness and peace
that come with Christmas tide.

Twenty miles east of the Green Mountains, on the White River, a branch
of the Connecticut, lies the little town of Sharon. To a humble family
living there, came additional joy that day. A son was born, and, though
they knew it not, he was destined to be very great. He was not the
first-born, two sons and a daughter had come before; but none the less
did his parents welcome him. They gave him his father's name--Joseph
Smith--a good name and never tarnished by an evil deed, but one to be
known for both good and evil through all the world.

The boy came of goodly parentage. The Smiths, since Robert and Mary
settled in Essex, Massachusetts, a century and a half before, had
been honorable farmers. Lucy Mack, the mother, was also of a family
of industrious land-owners. Members of both families had fought for
their country. The father and mother of the boy, Joseph and Lucy, when
they were married in 1796, and for a few years afterward, had been
well-to-do, but had lost all in paying the debts brought upon them by
the fraud of a trusted agent. They had left their home in Tunbridge,
Vermont, and moved to Sharon in the adjoining county of Windsor. Here
the father farmed in the summer and taught school in the winter. But
little success came as the reward of his industry. He tried other
places and at length, in the year 1815, he left the Green Mountain
state entirely and moved his family to New York.

It seems as though the Lord must have had a hand in the misfortunes of
Joseph Smith, Senior, and his wife Lucy. He was teaching them and their
children humility. They all had their share of hard work and of the
sacrifices that poverty brings. But hard work strengthened their bodies
and sacrifice strengthened their souls. They had no time to dream away
their lives. They were taught rather to be industrious and to do their
duty.

The father was a large, vigorous man, and the younger Joseph and his
brothers inherited his strength. They worked at his side in the fields
and helped him provide for the family wants. He taught them while at
work, and when at rest by the fireside, to be truthful, honest and
virtuous, and to love God. He gave them also lessons in reading and
writing, but they had no such chance to learn these things as have
children now-a-days.

The Lord doubtless directed the family in their journey westward to
New York. It was there that His latter-day work must begin. Joseph,
the instrument of that work, was nine years old at the time. The
family first came to Palmyra, Wayne County, a little town lying twelve
miles south of Lake Ontario. Here for about four years they labored
in clearing the land and making themselves a home. Then they moved a
mile or two south to Manchester, Ontario County, and took up land for
a farm. There were now eight children in the family: Alvin, Hyrum,
Sophronia, Joseph, Samuel, William, Catherine and Don Carlos.

In the second year after they had come to Manchester the Methodists of
that region began a religious revival. The Presbyterians and Baptists
soon joined. A revival is caused by holding frequent meetings where
those who attend preach, sing and pray, and try by all means to stir up
religious enthusiasm. Sometimes they go to great extremes, and scream
and groan and dance until nearly exhausted. These actions are of course
not directed by the Spirit of the Lord. In Manchester there was great
excitement and many were converted or at least joined themselves with
one or other of the sects. As the people began to divide up, much
strife arose, and so much bad feeling was shown that one could hardly
believe they were true followers of Jesus.



CHAPTER II.

1820.

JOSEPH INCLINED TO THINK SERIOUSLY UPON RELIGION--UNDECIDED AS TO WHICH
CHURCH TO JOIN--GETS LIGHT FROM THE BIBLE--HIS FIRST PRAYER--ANSWERED
BY A GLORIOUS VISION.

Joseph was fourteen years old at the time of the revival. He was large
for his age and inclined to be serious in his thoughts. With the other
members of his family he took great interest in religion and felt it
his duty to join some church and thereby be saved. But which church
should he join? That was very hard for the boy to answer. The other
members of the family decided that the Presbyterians were right, and
the mother, with Hyrum, Samuel and Sophronia joined their church. This
made Joseph very uneasy, because he was inclined to believe with the
Methodists, and the feeling between these two sects was very bitter.

His mind became greatly excited sometimes, for he felt that he ought to
do something to gain salvation, and yet he could not decide what was
right to do. He felt sure that all the churches could not be true, for
if they were they would unite to help each other instead of trying to
do each other harm. He thought that he should not join any church until
he knew the right one, and so he waited.

Joseph was only fourteen years old and did not have a good education,
but he could read the Bible and could understand many of the truths
written there. He made a practice of comparing the teachings of the
ministers that were seeking to convert him with the teachings of Jesus
and His Apostles. This made him all the more doubtful, for he saw that
they did not entirely agree.

He was certainly in great difficulty, but he persevered and at last
found a way out. In his Bible he came upon a passage that was written
for him and for all who need light. It is in the first chapter of the
Apostle James' epistle to the Saints, the fifth verse: "If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." Those words sank deep
into his heart. He thought them over again and again, and at length
made up his mind to obey them and pray for wisdom. In the sixth and
seventh verses James tells that we must not waver if we wish to receive
anything from the Lord. Joseph probably read these verses too, for when
he made up his mind to seek wisdom he was full of hope that the Lord
would hear him.

It was morning, early in the spring of 1820. The sky was clear, the air
cool and refreshing, and all was beautiful. Green woods surrounded the
home of Joseph, and to them he took his way alone. He found a suitable
spot and looked around to make sure that no one was near. Then he
kneeled down, and for the first time in his life sought the Lord in
vocal prayer.

He had barely begun when an unseen power seized him and made him
speechless. All grew frightfully dark, and he felt as though he were
about to be destroyed. He realized that it was the awful power of the
evil one, and he called on God to save him. But his strength was fast
giving way and sickening despair was taking possession of him, when a
pillar of divine light appeared above him and the prince of darkness
fled.

The light descended, and within it Joseph beheld two radiant beings,
too glorious and beautiful to be described. They looked just alike to
him and appeared to have equal splendor and authority, until one of
them, pointing to the other, said, "JOSEPH, THIS IS MY BELOVED SON,
HEAR HIM."

The humble boy was almost overcome by the glory of the vision before
him, and he could not at once continue his prayer for light. But the
kindliness and love of the Father and of the Lord Jesus gave him
assurance and he was at length able to speak. He asked which church was
right that he might join it, and even in the glory of the vision he was
surprised, for the divine instruction came that all were wrong.

Jesus said that all their creeds were an abomination in His sight;
that those professors were all corrupt; they drew near Him with their
lips, but their hearts were far from Him; they taught for doctrine the
commandments of men, having a form of godliness but they denied the
power thereof. He told Joseph that he should join none of them, but at
some future time the true Gospel would be revealed to him. Other words
of comfort and wisdom were spoken, and then the vision withdrew.

When Joseph came to himself he was lying on the ground looking up into
heaven. He was filled with a spirit of peace and joy, for now he knew
that he would yet be taught how he might save his soul. He knew that
God and Jesus were living beings with bodies which his own resembled.
He knew that they sympathized with him, and loved him, and oh, how
intensely did he love them! He rose and returned home feeling that he
had a glad message for mankind, which they would rejoice to hear.



CHAPTER III.

1820-23.

HOW THE ACCOUNT OF HIS VISION WAS RECEIVED--HIS FURTHER INQUIRY FOR
LIGHT--ANOTHER VISION.

For many centuries no person on earth had asserted that he had seen
and spoken with heavenly beings. People had almost forgotten that
visions and the ministering of angels had any part in human life.
When a country-bred lad declared that he had been visited by our
Father in heaven and His Son Jesus, the Creators of this earth and
its inhabitants, the people were astonished. Without thinking of the
matter seriously or seeking to find a cause for such bold words, they
immediately set them down as false, though the boy before this had been
known to be honest and truthful.

Some that heard his words feared they might be true, and since they did
not love the truth, sought to destroy it by ridicule and persecution. A
Methodist minister, who had taken much interest in Joseph on account of
his earnestness, was one of the first to whom the boy gave an account
of what he had seen. This man must have had less faith in God's power
than in Satan's, for he told Joseph that the vision was from the devil.
He said that since the Apostles there had been no revelations from God;
these things had ceased forever.

Joseph knew that he had seen a glorious vision. He could not deny it,
for in doing so he knew he would grievously offend God. Though only a
boy he was reviled and persecuted by all classes of men. The ministers
of the different churches sought especially to make life bitter for
him, and the members of his family suffered with him. Joseph's pious
friends of former days became his enemies and he had to seek new
associations. He says that these were sometimes not the best company,
and he fell into many foolish errors.

Three and a half years passed, and Joseph was nearly eighteen years
old. The thought began to grow in his mind that he ought to learn
how he stood before the Lord. He had often felt sorry for his wrong
doing and wished to seek forgiveness. The summer of 1823 had closed
and autumn had begun when Joseph decided that he would again ask for
light. On the evening of the 21st of September, after he had gone to
bed, he began to pray. He felt certain that an answer would come, for
the prayer was from his heart. He had not finished before the darkness
began to disappear. The humble bed-chamber was soon ablaze with
wondrous light, and in the midst he saw an angel.

The form of the messenger was that of a tall and stately man. His head
and neck were bare, and a graceful robe of lustrous white hung nearly
to his naked ankles. The majesty of his form was increased by the
exquisite beauty of his face, which shone like lightning. He stood near
the bed-side but touched neither ceiling, walls nor floor. It was a
spiritual sight; nothing on earth could approach it.

When Joseph's momentary fear had passed away, the angel, calling him by
name, began his message. He said that he was Moroni, and that he had
been sent from the presence of God. He told Joseph that his sins were
forgiven and that God had a great work for him to do. This work would
cause his name to be known for good or for evil among all nations,
kindreds and tongues. He spoke of a record engraved on plates of gold
and hidden in a nearby hill, that gave the history of the former
inhabitants of this land and contained the fullness of the Gospel. He
described the Urim and Thummim--those two strange, transparent stones
set in silver bows and fastened to a golden breastplate--and said that
God had prepared them to be used in translating the record.

Then the heavenly visitor began quoting from the ancient prophets and
apostles passages that referred to the last days, when the Priesthood
was to be restored, the Holy Spirit to be poured out on all flesh, and
peace and love were to reign on earth. Some he quoted just as they are
in the Bible, but he changed others, making them more plain. He told
Joseph of things that the boy could not mention afterward, because
they were too holy. He commanded him not to show the plates, Urim and
Thummim or breastplate, when he received them, to any person except
when commanded to do so by the Lord. The vision of the hill was opened
to Joseph's mind, while the angel spoke, and he distinctly saw just
where the record was hidden.

Then the light withdrew from other parts of the room, but became more
bright about the messenger and extended in a glowing path up into
heaven. Thither he ascended, darkness returned, and Joseph was left
to wonder and rejoice. Soon the light appeared again and the vision
was repeated just as before. Moroni added a prophecy of the terrible
judgments that were coming on earth, of hunger, bloodshed and disease,
and once more he rose heavenward. It seemed necessary that Joseph
should be deeply impressed with the message, and for the third time it
was given him. Each part was gone over with the same care as when given
first. The last words of the angel were a caution that he should never
use the plates, when he received them, except to glorify God and build
up His Kingdom.

The vision closed, and almost immediately the cocks began to crow. Soon
the autumn morning dawned, and though Joseph had not closed his eyes in
sleep, he arose to begin the labors of the day.



CHAPTER IV.

1823.

THE MORNING VISION--JOSEPH TELLS HIS FATHER--VISITS CUMORAH--THE PLATES
FOUND--MORONI'S COMMAND.

Joseph went to work with his father that morning as if nothing had
happened. He did not speak of the vision, though that doubtless was
uppermost in his mind. Perhaps he thought that new persecution might be
aroused and he would not spread the news of this visit of a heavenly
being unless necessary. He could not work with his usual vigor,
however, for his strength seemed to be gone. His father noticed that he
was unwell and sent him home. Joseph set out, but in trying to cross
the fence around the field, he fainted and fell to the ground.

When he became conscious, the angel Moroni in glory was again at his
side, and for the fourth time the entire vision was passed over. The
angel then directed Joseph to go and tell his father all that had
happened, and disappeared. Joseph returned and did so.

The father was probably much surprised to hear of the angel's visits
and of his message. He had little dreamed that at the surface of the
high hill within his sight were hidden sacred objects of priceless
value, that among them were writings which the wisest men could but
imperfectly understand, and that his unlearned son should be the
guardian of these and by the power of God was to bring forth a perfect
translation of them. But the father knew his boy and believed him. The
inspiration of the Holy Spirit rested on him and he told Joseph that
the vision was of God and that he should go and do as the angel had
commanded him.

Joseph's strength returned somewhat and he set out for the hill to find
the sacred record. The distance was only two and a half miles, so that
the walk was not very long, but on the way he was sorely tempted to
take the plates and use them for himself. The promptings of the Holy
Spirit were still with him, however, and he overcame this evil thought.

On the west side of the hill, near the summit, he found the rounded top
of a stone above the ground, and when he dug away the earth he saw that
it was the cover of the box. This stone was somewhat in the shape of a
shield with the outside upward, and when the earth covered the edges it
looked like the top of an ordinary bowlder. Joseph had seen this exact
spot in the vision and did not doubt that he would find the plates
below, but his heart beat fast when he put his lever under and began to
pry up the cover. He raised it without great difficulty and worked it
off, and then within his reach he beheld the hidden treasures of gold.

Perhaps this boy had never read of the wondrous caves of Aladdin and
Ali Baba or of the secret treasures of Monte Cristo Island, but every
boy has dreams of treasure-trove and of becoming rich and powerful.
Whether Joseph was dazzled by the rich prize before him and for the
moment thought this was just a dream come true, or whether he merely
wished to examine these beautiful strange things, we do not know, but
he reached forth to draw them out. Immediately their guardian appeared
and prevented him. The angel told him the time had not yet come for
him to receive them. He must return on that same day, the 22nd of
September, every year for four years, when if he should be faithful,
they would be given over into his care. This conversation occurred
September 22nd, 1823. Until the four years were passed they should
remain secure in their stone box.

Moroni told Joseph that he had hidden up the records four centuries
after the birth of Jesus, while he was living on the earth. He said
that the Nephites, the people to which he belonged, called the hill
where they stood Cumorah, and that a still earlier people, the
Jaredites, called it Ramah. This was a very important hill in the
history of both these peoples.

Joseph learned many other things that were new to him, and how strange
he must have felt when he realized that he was the only person on earth
to know them! While Moroni was still present, Joseph saw in vision the
glory of God's kingdom and the horror of Satan's. The angel told him
these had been shown that he might know the good from the evil and
never be influenced or overcome by Satan's power.

When the vision was ended Joseph replaced the stone, covered it as
before and returned home. That night when he retired to bed, he thanked
the Lord for what He had taught him, and prayed humbly that he might
keep himself pure and faithful. During the last twenty-four hours he
had been visited five times by an angel of light, he had seen a great
golden book, the history of the peoples that had passed away, and with
the book the holy seer-stone and the breastplate of gold. Besides all
this his life-work had been shown him, and he now knew something of
what he must suffer and what he must do.



CHAPTER V.

1824-27.

THE FOUR YEARS OF WAITING--JOSEPH WORKS IN PENNSYLVANIA--MARRIAGE--THE
LAST VISIT TO THE HILL--OUTRUNS THE ROBBERS.

For two years after this second great vision, Joseph labored at
ordinary work, sometimes on his father's farm, other times as hired
help away from home. His father and brothers also worked hard and
through their industry were able to live comfortably. Alvin, Joseph's
oldest brother, died in November, 1824, and this was a sad blow for
the young Prophet, for Alvin constantly comforted him in persecution
and rejoiced in the work he was to do. If he had lived he would have
been as brave and steadfast as was Hyrum, but he died and in dying gave
Joseph a brother's blessing.

In October, 1825, Joseph left home and went to work for Josiah Stoal
in what was said to be an old Spanish silver mine. It was situated in
Harmony, Susquehannah County, near the northern border of the state of
Pennsylvania. After digging uselessly for a month Joseph induced his
employer to stop the work, for he saw it was only a waste of labor. Mr.
Stoal had grown to like this tall, clear-headed youth and continued to
employ him.

Joseph boarded, while at Harmony, with Isaac Hale, and while living
there, fell in love with Mr. Hale's daughter Emma. She was a worthy
girl of high character, and they became engaged. There are some girls
that have not enough love within them to marry a man unless he is rich
or popular, or at least approved of by their friends or relatives; but
Emma Hale was not of this class. Joseph was poor, and did not have a
home of his own. He was persecuted also, and Emma's family objected to
her marrying a man who had so many enemies. But she knew he was a manly
man and believed him a chosen servant of God; she loved him and was
willing to leave a comfortable home and live in poverty among strangers
with him. They went to Squire Tarbill at South Bainbridge, New York,
to be married, and Joseph, leaving Mr. Stoal's employ, went home to
Manchester to work with his father.

The marriage occurred January 18th, 1827, less than a month after
Joseph's twenty-first birthday. He was a man now and the time was
drawing near when he should receive the plates. As Moroni commanded
him, he had gone each year to Cumorah and had seen the contents of the
stone box. The angel had taught him a great deal on each visit and had
encouraged him to do right.

On September 22, 1827, the four years of waiting ended, and for the
fifth time Joseph went to the hill. This time he opened the box, and
Moroni, who had watched over it for fourteen hundred years, gave him
the plates, the Urim and Thummim and the breastplate. The angel told
him that he must guard them with his life, if necessary, and if he lost
them through carelessness the Lord would reject him. Moroni warned him
that wicked men would try as hard as they could to get the plates from
him, but if Joseph did his best to keep them the Lord would help him.

The plates were about eight inches wide and each one was thinner than
common tin. There were so many, however, that it made a book about six
inches thick. All the sheets were bound together by three golden rings
that passed through one edge, and three smaller rings fastened the
other edge of about one third, so that this part was sealed. Each sheet
was engraved on both sides with small beautiful characters, but they
were very strange and not at all like anything Joseph had seen before.

The breastplate was of pure gold as were the plates. This was made to
cover the bosom of a large man and four golden straps extended from
the corners for the purpose of fastening it to the body. The Urim and
Thummim was attached to the breastplate though it could be removed. The
Urim and Thummim was like a large pair of spectacles with silver bows
and, instead of glasses, clear stones.

Joseph examined these beautiful things and was glad that the Lord
had entrusted them to him, but he felt, too, that it was a great
responsibility. He had learned much during the past four years and
knew that the possession of the plates would not increase his worldly
pleasures. He placed the treasures under his coat and, full of
determination to protect them, he set out for home. On the way wicked
men tried to rob him; they struck him with a heavy club; but Joseph was
a tall, strong man and a swift runner, and he escaped. They chased him
almost to his father's house without overtaking him, although he was
handicapped by the great weight that he carried.



CHAPTER VI.

1827-28.

PERSECUTION--MARTIN HARRIS COMES TO JOSEPH'S AID--ANTHON FULFILLS A
PROPHECY--MARTIN BECOMES SCRIBE--STRANGE BOOK-WRITERS.

The spirit of lying, robbery, and murder is awful when it comes upon
men, for it makes them seek to destroy the truth and to hinder the work
of God. Mobs filled with this spirit were aroused against Joseph. They
continually sought to steal the holy plates, and in doing this they
would willingly have murdered him, but he was very careful and the Lord
helped him. Ministers, who ought to have been teaching the people to be
honest and pure, were most prominent in spreading lies and stirring up
hate against the young Prophet. He had never harmed them, but he had
been brave enough to declare that the Lord had spoken to him, though
the world turned his enemy.

Moroni had directed Joseph to translate the record, but his enemies
were so cunning and so violent that he had to hide it to keep it out
of their hands. At one time they would suddenly break into the house
and tear up the hearth, at another they would climb into the attic
and search; but in every case Joseph had removed the treasure before
they came, and they hunted in vain. This of course kept him from
translating, and at length he decided that he would leave Manchester
and go to his wife's home in Pennsylvania, hoping to be able to work
there in peace. Joseph had received low wages while working for Mr.
Stoal and the year of farming had not brought him much money. But
Harmony, where Mr. Hale lived, was about one hundred and fifty miles
from Manchester and it was impossible for him to move without aid.

Sometimes the Lord inspires men to do strange things to help His work.
Martin Harris, a well-to-do farmer, came to Joseph at this time, and in
spite of all the lies he had heard, gave him fifty dollars. Joseph was
now able to reach Pennsylvania. On the way, there was some excitement,
for twice men came with search warrants and hunted for the plates.
These were hidden in a barrel of beans and the men who would have liked
to steal them failed.

It was December when he came to the home of his father-in-law, and
for two months he worked at copying the characters from the plates to
sheets of paper, and writing beneath the translation made by means of
the Urim and Thummim. In February, 1828, Martin Harris came down to
Pennsylvania and Joseph gave him the sheets. Martin took them to New
York City to find out whether the characters would be accepted as real
by learned men.

He showed them first to Prof. Charles Anthon of Columbia College.
Mr. Anthon examined them carefully and said that the translation was
correct and the best he had ever seen of Egyptian characters. He wrote
a certificate to this effect, and gave it to Martin. He asked how the
young man happened to find the plates, and when Martin said that an
angel had shown him where they lay, he asked for the certificate again.
Martin returned it and Mr. Anthon tore it to pieces, saying that there
was no such thing as the ministering of angels.

Although Mr. Anthon was too cowardly to let his name go before the
public connected with what an angel was said to have revealed, yet he
would have liked to obtain worldly praise by translating the record
himself, and asked Martin to bring it to him. When told that this could
not be done and that part of it was sealed, he replied, "I cannot read
a sealed book." If you read the twenty-ninth chapter of Isaiah you will
find that the prophet spoke of this circumstance two thousand five
hundred years ago.

Martin Harris carried the characters to Dr. Mitchell, another learned
man, and he also said they were genuine. This convinced Martin, and
he returned to Pennsylvania. He now arranged with Joseph to become
his scribe and to write at his dictation, but first it was necessary
to return home that he might prepare for a long stay. He came back to
Harmony about the middle of April ready to work.

Joseph had very little education at this time; he could not spell so
well as the ordinary school-boy can now; his time had been spent in
work, and he had had few opportunities to learn. But now a book lay
before him written long ago in a strange tongue and he was to translate
it into English. Isaiah said that the sealed book should be given to
one that was not learned, and certainly it had now been done. Joseph
could not take honor to himself as the translator of it; he was only a
humble instrument in the hands of God in bringing it forth.

When Martin came the second time he immediately began service with
Joseph, and no writer of books ever worked as did they. A screen
divided the room in which they sat. On one side of this was the young
Prophet--a tall, manly fellow, dressed in working clothes that had seen
long use, his serious, handsome face bronzed by the sun and wind, and
his hands hardened by toil. Before him lay a pile of golden leaves in
book form, worth a fabulous sum from a worldly standpoint, and yet too
sacred to be looked on even, except by the one chosen to bring them
forth. Before his eyes he held large spectacles with thick, bright
stones as glasses. Slowly he read aloud in simple English from the
strange figures on the metal pages. On the other side sat a somewhat
older man, well-dressed, but plainly a country-man, busily writing down
the words that were spoken.



CHAPTER VII.

1828-1829.

MARTIN HARRIS IMPATIENT--THE MANUSCRIPT LOST--GOD'S WISDOM
SHOWN--JOSEPH REPENTS--SLOW PROGRESS OF TRANSLATION.

Joseph and Martin worked together until the translation covered one
hundred and sixteen pages of foolscap paper. Martin Harris was not
a patient man, and it occurred to him that he would like to show
his friends what he had written without waiting until the work was
completed. Joseph refused to permit this, for the work was not done to
gratify curiosity; but Martin teased and Joseph inquired of the Lord.
The answer forbade Joseph's letting the manuscript go, but Martin was
not satisfied and worried him until he asked again. Once more the
Lord refused, and for a time Martin worked along without complaining;
but his wife and other members of his family desired to see what was
written of the new book, and he again induced Joseph to ask.

It was wrong for the Prophet to give way after the Lord had twice
answered him, but Martin made so many promises to be careful that there
seemed little reason for fearing injury to the manuscript. The last
time the Lord replied that Martin might take the writings on condition
that he would show them only to five persons, his wife, father and
mother, brother and sister-in-law. Joseph, too, was held responsible
for them. With very solemn vows Martin Harris covenanted to guard the
writings and return them, but he was tempted to show them to other
persons and they were stolen from him. They fell into the hands of evil
men and neither he nor Joseph ever saw them again.

The Urim and Thummim had been taken from the Prophet because he
displeased the Lord in asking so often about the writings. When Martin
had gone from Harmony after two months of work as scribe, Joseph went
to his father's home on a visit, being unable to go on with the work.
He soon returned from Manchester and the Urim and Thummim was given
back to him. He was permitted to keep it while the Lord gave him a
revelation, and then it with the plates was taken away. Do not think
that the Lord could not have given the revelation without the Urim and
Thummim. In later years Joseph did not use it, but he was still young
and the Lord perhaps thought it best to make him feel dependent by not
communing openly at all times with him.

The revelation was a rebuke to him for his weakness and a warning that
though he had been much favored he would still be rejected if he were
not faithful and humble. The Lord told him that the work should still
go on, even though he proved faithless. Joseph's sensitive spirit was
deeply hurt and he humbly repented of what he had done.

The plates and the Urim and Thummim were given back to him again and
he was directed to continue his labors. It was revealed that if he
should re-translate what Martin Harris had lost, those who had stolen
the manuscript would change it in places and would deceive the world
by saying that Joseph could not translate twice alike, and therefore
his work was not of God. But though Satan had laid a cunning plot, the
wisdom of God triumphed.

If you have read the Book of Mormon you have perhaps noticed a
difference in the books of First Nephi, Second Nephi, Jacob, Enos,
Jarom and Omni, from what follows. If you have not read this beautiful
record, remember to notice the difference when you do, and you will see
one sign of the complete wisdom and forethought of God. These books
were written on the small plates of Nephi, and when Mormon, the father
of Moroni, found them, he joined them to the abridgment he had made
of the larger plates. The two sets of plates cover the same period
of history, but the larger set deals more with government and the
political affairs, while the smaller is rather a record of the dealings
of the Lord with the people.

Nephi hardly knew why he was commanded by the Lord to make the smaller
plates and write upon them, but he obeyed. Moroni tells us he did not
know why he was moved upon to add them to his abridgment. But we now
see the purpose of the Lord in it. The translation that Martin Harris
lost was from Mormon's abridgment of the larger plates. Joseph was
commanded to translate the same part from the smaller plates, and
thus Satan's plan to deceive could not be used. This change makes the
Book of Moroni more valuable, too, because on the smaller plates were
written many choice prophecies and revelations that Mormon did not give
in the abridgment.

Joseph did not at once begin to translate, but for a time worked on
a small farm he had bought from his wife's father, Isaac Hale. He
received a number of important revelations about this time for the
comfort and instruction of himself and of others who came to him. When
he began to translate again the work went on very slowly for he had no
one to write for him regularly. Sometimes his wife Emma could spare
time and a little progress was made. But Joseph and Emma had lost their
firstborn child, a son, soon after his birth in July 1828, and the
mother through grief and poor health could give but little assistance
in the work. This state of affairs continued until April 1829.



CHAPTER VIII.

1829.

OLIVER COWDERY BECOMES SCRIBE--JOSEPH AND OLIVER PRAY FOR NEW
LIGHT--THE PRIESTHOOD RESTORED--THE FIRST BAPTISMS--KINDNESS OF JOSEPH
KNIGHT.

Joseph was now twenty-three years old, and his life up to this time had
been in a sense only a preparation for his work. He had held the plates
for a year and a half and though he had studied them and had translated
a considerable part yet through Martin Harris' sin he was still at the
beginning of the book. But that time had been valuable for him, though
he had little to show for it. He had learned what the displeasure of
the Lord means and, though forgiven, he had been taught a lesson that
he never forgot. Still he had been true to his trust in guarding the
plates and no mortal eyes except his own had looked upon them.

As the sun was setting on Sunday, April 5, 1829, a young man came into
Harmony and sought Joseph for the purpose of making his acquaintance
and of helping him. This man was Oliver Cowdery, who during the past
winter had taught school at Manchester and, as teachers in country
schools used to do, he boarded around at the students' homes. In these
visits he came to live with the family of Joseph Smith, Senior, and
there he heard of the younger Joseph and his work. He was at first
struck by the strangeness of it all, and then prayed seriously to God
to learn whether He really had revealed Himself in this day. The Holy
Ghost manifested to him that Joseph had assuredly been visited by
celestial beings and that he was called to aid the young Prophet in his
work.

When school had closed, therefore, Oliver came to Pennsylvania, and two
days after meeting Joseph, the young men set themselves earnestly to
the work of translation. There were few interruptions, and as Oliver
was used to writing, the progress was rapid. Sometimes they found
things in the Book of Mormon or the Bible that they did not understand,
although they talked them over together and studied them ever so hard,
and when this happened they asked the Lord to explain these matters to
them. Sometimes they prayed just as we do, and sometimes Joseph put on
the Urim and Thummim besides; but the Lord always answered them and
showed them what they did not understand.

When tired of writing they would often go for a walk in the woods or
down to the river for recreation and healthful exercise. A favorite
pastime was to throw stones into the stream. Joseph especially was very
fond of jumping and wrestling, and was expert at both. It is said that
he could walk under a pole--he was six feet tall--and then, taking a
step or two back, jump over it. He was a noted wrestler, and in later
life even, he often enjoyed a vigorous bout. Though his life was a most
busy one he still found time to keep his body strong and healthy and to
relax his mind by athletic practice.

About a month after beginning work, Joseph translated from the plates
a passage that spoke of baptism. It said that it is necessary to be
baptized in order that a person's sins may be washed away and forgiven.
Neither Joseph nor Oliver had been forgiven of past sins by baptism,
and after talking over the matter earnestly, on the fifteenth of May,
1829, they went into the woods to pray for light. While they were
kneeling a voice from the midst of heaven bade them have peace, then
the veil parted and John the Baptist came down before them. This is
the same brave prophet who preached repentance and the coming of the
Savior, in the wilderness of Judea and baptized Him in Jordan. John
was beheaded while in prison by Herod, but now he came quickened and
clothed with glory.

He calmed them with his gentle yet thrilling voice, telling them he was
their fellow-servant and acting under the direction of Peter, James
and John. He laid his hands upon their heads and ordained them to the
Aaronic Priesthood, which he represented in life. His words were:

    "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the
    priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of
    angels and of the gospel of repentance and of baptism by immersion
    for the remission of sins; and this shall never again be taken from
    the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto
    the Lord in righteousness."

John then directed Joseph to baptize Oliver and that Oliver should
baptize Joseph; after this in the same way they should ordain each
other to the Aaronic Priesthood. He said that they must not lay on
hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost as that was not the power of the
Priesthood of Aaron. Later the Melchizedek Priesthood would be given
them and then they could lay on hands and perform other holy offices.

There was a river nearby and Joseph and Oliver went into it together,
prepared to perform the sacred ordinance. It was a strange sight on
earth, and no doubt the hosts of heaven were glad, for since the
righteous Nephites no man had been cleansed from sin in the waters
of baptism. Joseph seriously spoke the simple words of the ordinance
and then laid Oliver beneath the water. As he drew him up, suddenly
the spirit of prophecy came upon Oliver. He was filled with joy and
foretold glorious things that were about to come to pass. Oliver then
baptized Joseph and the Holy Spirit fell in a like manner upon him. He
prophesied concerning the rise of the Church and of its progress, and
declared many things that were to happen in that generation.

Filled with these exalted feelings, Joseph laid his hands upon Oliver's
head and ordained him a Priest after the order of Aaron, and Oliver did
the same to Joseph. They already held the Priesthood, because that was
given by John, but they re-ordained each other as a pattern for others,
since the Priesthood was to be conferred in the future after baptism.

From this time on the minds of the young men were enlightened and they
understood things that had been mysteries before. Persecution had
begun, and for a time they said nothing about what had taken place; but
soon they began explaining the scriptures to all who would listen.

Joseph's brother Samuel, who came on a visit at this time, was shown
the translation already made, and heard the testimony of Joseph and
Oliver. After a time he became partially converted and went alone
to pray and learn from the Lord whether the work was true. A strong
testimony was given him, and soon after Oliver baptized him. On coming
out of the water he too began to prophesy remarkable things, as Oliver
and Joseph had done. Samuel returned home and Hyrum came to Harmony. He
heard the truth and believed.

A very kind service was done the Prophet at this time by Joseph Knight,
an old gentleman living in Broome County, New York. Now and at other
times, he brought a load of provisions in order that Joseph and Oliver
might keep on translating. But though supplied with food and protected
from violence by the family of Isaac Hale, still persecution grew very
severe against them and it seemed necessary to move from Harmony, if
they wished to work in peace.



CHAPTER IX.

1829.

DAVID WHITMER TAKES THE PROPHET TO FAYETTE--MANY BELIEVE AND ARE
BAPTIZED--ELEVEN WITNESSES SEE THE PLATES AND BEAR RECORD--THE HIGHER
PRIESTHOOD RESTORED--THE TRANSLATION FINISHED.

Early in June, 1829, a young man drove up to Joseph's door after two
days of hard traveling. He said that he had come from Fayette, Seneca
Co., New York, one hundred and fifty miles away, for the purpose of
carrying the Prophet and his companion to Fayette if they wished to
go. He was David Whitmer, son of Peter Whitmer, and his father invited
Joseph to come to their home. They offered him protection and to
provide for his wants while he was working at the translation.

Joseph accepted the invitation and, leaving Emma with her father, he
and Oliver departed with David. Before setting out Joseph asked the
Lord how he should carry the plates. In answer to his prayer Moroni
appeared and took them from him, promising to return them again. When
he reached Fayette the angel visited him in Mr. Whitmer's garden and
gave them over to him.

The translation continued very rapidly, for when Oliver grew tired,
David or his brother John was ready to write at the Prophet's
dictation. When not translating, Joseph and Oliver spent their time in
teaching those who came to listen and in explaining what the Lord had
revealed to them.

There were many serious persons who wished to hear the truth. David
Whitmer had been remarkably aided that he might hasten to bring Joseph
to Fayette. Three strange men were seen scattering the plaster that
David had put in a heap upon one of his fields to fertilize it, and
they did it with more than human skill and speed. In harrowing in wheat
on another field David had done in one day more than he could usually
have done in two or three days. Many in the neighborhood hearing of
this were impressed that the Lord had helped him in bringing the two
young men and believed that they were His servants.

When any person became convinced that the work was divine and desired
to be baptized, that ordinance was performed. Joseph soon had the
pleasure of baptizing his brother Hyrum and David Whitmer, and at the
same time Oliver baptized Peter Whitmer, Junior. Soon there were so
many believers that baptisms were performed nearly every day in Seneca
lake, a beautiful body of water lying on the western border of Seneca
County.

While at work on the translation it was learned that three persons
should be shown the sacred plates in order that their testimony might
be given to the world. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris
begged Joseph to ask the Lord if they could not be the ones. Joseph did
this during the month of June, 1829, and the Lord answered that if they
trusted in His words with full purpose of heart they should be shown
the plates, the breastplate, Urim and Thummim, sword of Laban and the
Liahona, or compass, given to Lehi in the wilderness. Soon after they
all went into the woods to pray that the Lord would show the plates,
which Joseph had given up for the time to the Angel Moroni.

The four men kneeled down and Joseph offered a prayer, then the others
in turn prayed, but no answer came. Joseph began again and the others
followed but though they prayed with fervor yet they failed to receive
any manifestation. Before beginning again Martin Harris said he
believed he was the cause of the failure. He offered to go aside and
pray alone.

Martin had spoken the truth, for soon after he withdrew, a light of
surpassing fairness came down from heaven and within it stood the angel
holding the golden plates. He turned the leaves and the characters
engraved thereon were illumined so that the witnesses saw them plainly.
They also heard the voice of the Lord declaring that the plates before
them were revealed by God and had been translated by His power. They
were commanded to bear record that the translation was correct.

When the vision passed away Joseph sought Martin Harris. He found
him, humbled by this rebuke for his past wickedness and praying with
his whole heart for forgiveness and for the privilege of viewing the
record. Joseph joined him in prayer and soon the angel again appeared
and the whole vision was repeated. Martin had never beheld a spiritual
sight before and he could not long bear the glory before him, but he
was filled with joy and shouted hosannah to God.

The three men who had been chosen as witnesses drew up and signed a
statement, which is now printed in the fore part of the Book of Mormon.
They testified to all the world that they had seen an angel holding the
plates and heard the voice of God declaring that the translation was
correct. Oliver Cowdery, the first signer, went on missions and did
much good, but he lost his virtue and fell. In 1838 he was cut off from
the Church. David Whitmer lost his standing at the same time and Martin
Harris in the same year. For nine years Oliver Cowdery was separated
from the Church and for thirty-three years Martin Harris remained away,
but both were finally rebaptized and died in the Church. David Whitmer
never came back, but he and his fellow-witnesses affirmed time after
time that they had really seen the angel and beheld the golden plates.

The Prophet was permitted to show the record to eight other persons as
an additional testimony. They were Christian, Jacob and John Whitmer
and Peter Whitmer, Jun., Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., and his sons
Hyrum and Samuel H. Smith. These men handled the plates and seriously
judged them to be of gold and engraved with ancient work. They were
without exception unflinching in their testimony that the Book of
Mormon is true.

When John the Baptist visited Joseph and Oliver to give them the
Aaronic Priesthood he promised that the Priesthood of Melchizedek would
later be conferred upon them. They became very desirous to receive
this and made it a matter of prayer. As they were once asking the Lord
about it they heard His voice directing them to ordain each other, but
not until they were accepted as spiritual teachers by those already
baptized. Sometime after this, during the month of June, 1829, Peter,
James and John appeared to them and conferred upon them the holy
Priesthood. These three had been chosen by Jesus Christ when He lived
on the earth to preside over the Priesthood and it was their office to
restore it when the Lord chose to permit men on the earth again to hold
it.

The work of translation was now drawing to an end, and a contract was
made with Egbert B. Grandin of Palmyra to print five thousand copies.
In August, 1829, the work of printing began. The copy used was not the
original manuscript, but the whole was rewritten and Joseph preserved
the original. Three thousand dollars was the price agreed on and Martin
Harris gave security for its payment. In March, 1830, the book was
issued to the world.

When the work was finished Joseph with Oliver took the sacred treasures
to the Hill Cumorah. They did not, however, replace them in the stone
box, but, when they reached the hill the earth opened and they walked
into a spacious room. They laid the plates down on a table, upon which
stood many other plates, and left them to be guarded by the angel.
Treasure seekers have searched for them, the stone box has been torn
away, but they have been sought in vain and they will remain hidden
until the Lord's own due time.

Oliver Cowdery was left by Joseph to watch over the work of printing
and the Prophet was free to visit his wife at Harmony. It was, however,
a busy winter for him, for he received many revelations concerning the
organization of the Church, and he spent much time in declaring the
truth to all who would listen.



CHAPTER X.

1830.

THE CHURCH ORGANIZED--JOSEPH ACCEPTED AS LEADER--THE HOLY GHOST
CONFERRED--JOSEPH CASTS THE DEVIL FROM NEWEL KNIGHT--THE FIRST
CONFERENCE.

On the sixth day of April, in the year eighteen hundred and thirty, was
organized at the home of Peter Whitmer in Fayette, Seneca county, New
York, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Six men made the
organization, and their names are Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery,
Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith and David Whitmer.

It was a humble beginning for the Church of Jesus Christ, as was His
beginning humble when He came upon the earth. At that time mighty
mansions and gorgeous palaces stood as the dwelling places of royalty,
but the Great King was born where cattle and beasts of burden were
housed. Now splendid churches and magnificent cathedrals stood as
places of worship, but Christ's Church was organized and the mighty
work of salvation begun in a house of logs in an obscure village and by
country men of little worldly learning.

But the Spirit of God and the holy Priesthood were there. Jesus had
revealed the manner of organization and the day, and had commanded that
it be called after Him since it was His Church. The six men had been
forgiven of sin through baptism. Under these circumstances the rudeness
of the surroundings was of little account.

The meeting opened by prayer. Joseph and Oliver were first accepted
as spiritual teachers, and then Joseph laid his hands on Oliver's
head and ordained him an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. Oliver ordained Joseph to the same office, and they
administered the sacrament. They now possessed the authority to confer
the Holy Ghost, and they did so by laying their hands upon the heads of
their companions, and at the same time they confirmed them members of
the Church.

As on the day of Pentecost when the Holy Ghost, coming down from Heaven
like cloven tongues of fire, gave to the Apostles new understanding,
so now the minds of those who received it were filled with light. Some
prophesied, and all rejoiced and praised God with thankful hearts. To
Joseph was given a revelation calling him to the leadership and Oliver
to the place of second Elder and preacher in the Church and commanding
the members to give Joseph their obedience. The Spirit also directed
Joseph and Oliver to call out and ordain some of the members to
different offices in the Priesthood.

A number of persons besides the six members were present at the meeting
on the sixth of April and they soon asked that they might be baptized
and received into the Church. Joseph's father and mother and Martin
Harris were among these. On the following Sunday, April 11th, Oliver
Cowdery preached the first sermon of this dispensation of the Gospel.
The meeting was again at Peter Whitmer's house and many were present.
Six more desired baptism, and Oliver performed the ordinance in Seneca
Lake. A week later he baptized seven others in the same place.

Soon after the Church was organized the Prophet set out to visit the
family of Joseph Knight, at Colesville, Broome county. You remember
that Mr. Knight had helped Joseph, and the work, a year before by
bringing provisions to Harmony. In gratitude Joseph now carried to
him what is better than food in the greatest hunger--the Gospel. He
was very kindly received and had the privilege of holding a number
of meetings. Many honest souls became interested and sought for
testimonies.

Newel Knight, the son of Joseph Knight, was one of these and had
promised the Prophet that he would pray in meeting. When the time
came, however, he was unwilling, and said that he would pray first in
secret. Joseph could not induce him to call upon the Lord there. Newel
came back from the woods next morning, where he had retired, very much
distressed. He had tried to pray, but he felt he had done wrong to
refuse when called upon and now it was very hard to ask the Lord for
light. He grew ill and sent his wife for Joseph.

When the Prophet reached the house Newel was in a frightful condition.
His features and limbs were twisted out of shape and he was being
thrown violently around the room. A number of persons had come, but
they knew not what to do. Joseph at length caught his hand and Newel
immediately spoke and begged the Prophet to cast the devil out of
him. Joseph rebuked the evil spirit, and in the name of Jesus Christ
commanded it to depart. Newel was instantly freed from it, and declared
that he saw the devil come out of him and disappear.

He was in his natural state only for a moment. Another power seized him
and raised him to the ceiling where he remained for a time unconscious.
But this was the Spirit of God, not of the devil, and when he came to
himself he told of a heavenly vision of unspeakable beauty that had
been given him.

Those present in the room were astonished. They had seen the destroying
power of Satan and the enlightening power of God. They had beheld a
miracle such as the world had not seen since the time of the Apostles,
and they were convinced that Joseph held the same power as did they of
old.

Joseph soon went back to Fayette, and continued his teaching among the
people. On the first day of June, 1830, the first conference of the
Church was held, at the Whitmer home. It opened by singing and prayer
and the sacrament was administered. A number of confirmations were
made and the Holy Ghost again descended upon the Saints. The spirit of
prophecy rested upon some, while others beheld glorious visions and
sank to the floor overcome.

Newel Knight, who had journeyed to Fayette shortly before and been
baptized by David Whitmer, had the curtain of heaven again drawn aside.
He looked upon his Redeemer Jesus sitting beside the Eternal Father,
and he realized that some day it would be his blessed privilege to come
into their presence and dwell forever. The future was unfolded before
him and he saw the progress of God's Kingdom on earth.

Much instruction was given the Saints, and they were filled with
gratitude for what they had seen and heard. Their hearts overflowed
with joy and love and they felt eager to press forward in the work.
Once more believers came forth and requested baptism, and David Whitmer
was appointed by the Prophet to perform it.



CHAPTER XI.

1830.

BAPTISMS AT COLESVILLE--JOSEPH ARRESTED--DAVIDSON AND REID ON THE
DEFENSE--SUFFERING LIKE THE MASTER--NARROW ESCAPE FROM MOBS.

When the conference of June 1st, 1830, was over Joseph went to his home
at Harmony after a somewhat long absence. He had no time, however, to
settle down and rest; he was still needed in the work of our blessed
Master, and so taking his wife with him he set out for Colesville
accompanied by Oliver Cowdery, David and John Whitmer.

Many persons were there who had faith in the Lord and in His work and
had repented of past wrong doing. They now desired to be cleansed from
sin by baptism, and to be given the Holy Ghost that they might be
numbered with the Saints.

It was Joseph's intention to have the baptism performed on Sunday, and
on Saturday afternoon he and the others placed a dam across a stream
near Mr. Knight's house so that the water would be deep enough. The
baptizing had to be put off, however, for during the night the dam
was torn away by a mob that had been aroused by the ministers of the
neighborhood. It would be interesting to know the texts used that
Sunday by these pastors who were hired to lead their flocks in Godly
and peaceful paths.

Monday morning early the dam was again built before the mob was astir,
and Oliver Cowdery baptized thirteen persons. Among these was Emma
Smith, the Prophet's wife. It was a joyful occasion for Joseph. Before
the baptizing was finished the mob had come together and begun to show
an ugly spirit. Joseph and his friends retired to Mr. Knight's house.
The mob followed and tried to pick a quarrel, but the brethren would
not quarrel and so these bad men had no excuse to hurt them although
they would have liked to do it.

A meeting was set for the evening, to confirm those baptized. The
people had gathered and were just ready to commence when in walked
a constable and arrested Joseph on the charge of being a disorderly
person, and of setting the country in an uproar by preaching the Book
of Mormon. What a charge! Joseph had held a few quiet meetings in
private houses, and the uproar was not begun by him.

You can imagine that the people were surprised and some, no doubt, were
pretty angry, but Joseph allowed himself to be arrested quietly. He
acted so like a true gentleman--he always was a gentleman--and had such
an honest face and manly bearing that the officer made up his mind that
he was no rascal but a true man, and straightway became his friend.
And it was fortunate for Joseph that he did, because he had intended
to lead the Prophet into a trap. Of course, now he changed his mind
and told him that the arrest was only a trick to get him away from his
friends and let him fall into the hands of the mob, which was lying in
wait for him on the road. The constable determined to try a trick of
his own on the mob, and they set out together in a light wagon.

They had not gone very far before they came upon a crowd of
evil-looking men, who gathered about to seize Joseph as soon as the
wagon stopped. The constable drove in among them and they awaited his
signal. Suddenly he seized his whip and gave his horse a cut and before
the ruffians could stir the wagon was just out of their reach. Then
began a great race--horse against man, and the horse was getting the
best of it. The mob, though they ran as fast as they could, were being
left behind, and Joseph and the officer were breathing more easily,
when suddenly off came the wagon-wheel. What a plight they were in! If
they had stopped to say bad words about their luck they would probably
have been caught, for the mob were racing down the road like mad, but
they did not swear, they jumped from the wagon, replaced the wheel,
fastened it, and away they sped again just in time to escape.

They continued to South Bainbridge in the adjoining county and here
secured a room in a tavern for the night. The constable gave Joseph the
bed while he slept with his feet against the door with a loaded musket
at his side. They were not disturbed.

Next day the Prophet came as prisoner into court. It was the first time
that he had ever been tried on any charge. Many times afterwards he was
taken before courts for trial, and yet in no case was he ever found
guilty. But though he suffered so much from wicked persecutors he never
refused to submit himself to the law.

When the constable had come and taken Joseph away from the meeting,
it broke up, and Joseph Knight went to two of his neighbors, James
Davidson and John Reid to engage them to defend the Prophet in court.
These men were honorable, intelligent farmers who understood well the
principles of justice and the laws of the land. Though they had never
seen Joseph and were in no way connected with the Church they consented
to take his case in spite of the violent prejudice against him.

Mr. Reid afterwards said that when asked he was at first unwilling on
account of other work, but before he could refuse he heard a low voice
say, "You must go to deliver the Lord's anointed!" The messenger had
not spoken and had not heard the voice, and Mr. Reid felt that he had
received instruction from heaven. He willingly took the case, feeling
sure of success.

The prosecution was carried on by a Presbyterian named Seymour, and he
tried by false witnesses to win the case, but Joseph's lawyers pleaded
well, and the judge set him free. He was immediately arrested again
by another constable and taken back to Colesville, Broome county, to
be tried there. They stayed over night at a tavern, and during the
evening, the officer invited bad men in to join him in abusing the
Prophet.

What they did there would have shocked a decent heathen, Joseph was a
helpless prisoner in the hands of an officer of the law and there was
no reason for thinking him guilty of any crime. Yet that coward officer
with his associates spit upon him, and cursed him, and then pointing
their fingers at him told him to prophesy. You all have heard how Judas
led the multitude against Jesus as he prayed on the mount of Olives,
and how they took Him to the house of Caiaphas the high priest to bring
false witness against Him. And there they buffeted Him, and spit upon
Him, and told Him to prophesy. Joseph thought of this, and though his
sensitive nature must have sickened at the treatment, yet he remembered
that he was only servant and that the Master had suffered thus. In both
cases it was the same low, cowardly spirit of Satan, the spirit that
always seeks to pollute the pure and unprotected.

The Prophet had eaten nothing since morning and was hungry and tired.
He asked for food, and the constable gave him a few crusts of bread.
He then offered security for his appearance and asked that he might be
allowed to spend the night at home. This was refused. He was compelled
to sleep against the wall and the constable took away all chance of
comfort by lying at his side and holding him all night long.

Next day Joseph was again tried, and the same lawyers and witnesses
were present to prosecute him, as on the day before. He was glad to
find there also the men who had so ably defended him. The evidence
against the Prophet was shown either to be false or to have no
bearing on the subject. Lawyer Seymour sought to prejudice the court
by a violent speech, but Mr. Davidson and Mr. Reid spoke with such
astonishing power in his behalf that the accusers cowered before them.
They each thanked God that they were permitted to defend a man whose
character was so free from guilt.

So effective was the defense in this case that many who had wished the
Prophet harm now became his friends. Even the constable who had been
so unmanly, asked his pardon and offered him aid. The officer told him
that the mob had gathered and was determined to tar and feather Joseph
and ride him on a rail, since he could not be injured legally. He led
the Prophet out by a secret way and Joseph escaped. Next day with his
wife he returned to his home in Harmony.

Those baptized at Colesville had not yet been confirmed members of
the Church, because such a bad, un-American spirit had taken hold of
the people there that Joseph and his friends hardly dared to be found
in the neighborhood for fear of being hurt or killed. After a little
while, however, he and Oliver came on foot from Harmony, but they had
no sooner reached Mr. Knight's house than their enemies, learning they
were there, formed a mob and came to capture them. Now what should
the two men have done in such a position? They might have remained,
determined to have their rights, and with the help of their friends
fought the mob. They were not afraid, Oliver was brave, and Joseph
Smith did not know what fear was. But they were ministers of peace,
and peace could be had only by going away, and they went. They did
not stop for food or drink, but hurried to escape, for their enemies
were following like a pack of bloodhounds. Several times they were
nearly caught, but they were strong men and outran their pursuers. They
traveled all night and reached home in the morning, pretty thoroughly
tired out.

In July, 1830, Oliver Cowdery left Joseph and went to Fayette to labor
there. In his place, as scribe to the Prophet, came John Whitmer and
Joseph with his help began to re-write and arrange the revelations
that he had received up to this time. Many had been given, and it was
necessary that they be kept for the use of the Church in the future.



CHAPTER XII.

1830.

FIGHTING THE EVIL ONE--THE MOB BLINDED--PRESIDENT ALONE TO RECEIVE
REVELATION FOR THE CHURCH--FIRST MISSIONARY MOVEMENT--WORKING IN THE
WEST.

When Joseph first visited the hill Cumorah the Lord let him look upon
the kingdom of heaven and upon the kingdom of hell. He saw the powers
of each, and the methods and influences that each used. This vision was
of great value to him throughout life. The contrast made him desire
with all his heart to reach heaven and kept him on the alert at all
times to escape hell. What was also very important, it gave him a
complete knowledge of the practices and weapons of Satan, the enemy of
truth.

All this he beheld in vision, but through the following years in real
life he saw these powers of evil at work, and he had to fight against
them. Thanks to the knowledge given him, to his faithfulness and to
the help of the Lord, he came off victor in every engagement. He had
met Satan in the thieves and murderers that tried to steal the plates,
in the lying ministers that sought to blacken his character, in the
violent devil that nearly destroyed Newel Knight and in the mobs that
only recently attempted to capture and kill him.

It was now necessary for him to meet another attack of the evil one,
and it gave him more grief than any up to this time. While working with
John Whitmer at Harmony, probably during the latter part of July, 1830,
Joseph received a letter from Oliver, who was at Fayette, commanding
him in the name of the Lord to erase part of a revelation he had
received.

Joseph saw that Satan was now in the flock and that Oliver had been
deceived by him. He wrote asking by what authority Oliver commanded him
to change the words that God had spoken. He soon visited Fayette and
found that the Whitmer family had joined with Oliver. He reasoned with
them and one after another they came to see their error and repented
sincerely.

After returning to Harmony the Prophet was visited by Newel Knight and
his wife. A little meeting was arranged, and Joseph started to buy wine
for the sacrament, but an angel appeared and told him not to use wine
for this purpose unless made by themselves. Since that time throughout
the Church wine has never been used except when new and home-made. At
the meeting Emma and Newel's wife were confirmed, and though only five
members were present they had an enjoyable time, for the Spirit of the
Lord was there.

Near the end of August, Joseph with his brother Hyrum, David and John
Whitmer, went to Colesville to confirm the others whom Oliver had
baptized. It was a dangerous thing to do, so they prayed that the eyes
of evil men might be blinded and that they might fulfill their purpose.
Near Newel's house they met many of their enemies working on the road.
They looked closely at the brethren but failed to recognize them.

A good meeting was held that night; the confirmations were attended
to and the sacrament was administered. Next morning Joseph and his
companions went home. Soon after they left, an angry mob surrounded
the house and spent the rest of the day in wicked threats against the
Saints.

The spirit of persecution had been growing in Harmony through the
diligent efforts of a Methodist minister who would not mind his own
business. Through his lies Isaac Hale was at length prejudiced and
refused to protect Joseph any longer. Soon after the Prophet returned
from Colesville the last time, Newel Knight came with his wagon and
moved him to Fayette on the invitation of the Whitmers.

Here was another trial. Hiram Page, brother-in-law of David Whitmer,
had been receiving revelations through a peculiar stone. They were
directed to the Church, though they were contrary to the Gospel as
explained both in the Bible and in the revelations given through
Joseph. Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family were again deceived.

Joseph was grieved. At Colesville the hearts of strange men were
filled with hate, at Harmony his friends and relatives had turned
against him, and now at Fayette his brethren were rejecting him and
the Lord. He went quietly to work and induced Oliver to pray with him.
An answer came in a revelation of very great importance. The Lord told
Oliver that Joseph Smith, Jr., was the only man that should receive
revelations for the Church, until another should be appointed in his
stead. Every faithful man may be directed by the Lord and be taught by
the Holy Spirit, but the president alone has the authority to command
the Church in the name of the Lord.

A conference was held September 1, 1830, and Joseph, of course,
presided. He was very careful and wise and he at length convinced Hiram
Page and the others that the revelations were from the devil. They were
rejected by all, and again they repented for lack of faith. The Lord
forgave them, for His Spirit rested with power upon the conference and
brought harmony and love and greater faith. At this time the glorious
principle of the gathering was revealed, and that Zion should be built
up in the land bordering the Lamanites.

Parley P. Pratt who had recently been baptized in Seneca lake by Oliver
Cowdery came again to Fayette after carrying the Gospel to his kindred
in eastern New York. He himself had received it in a very strange way.
In the beginning of the year 1830, he prayed that he might understand
the scriptures. He had always loved them and studied them diligently,
but after the Lord in answer to his prayer enlightened his mind, he
saw how ignorant the world was of their true meaning. He felt called
to preach the truths, and after selling his house in the backwoods
of Ohio where he lived, and settling his affairs he set out with his
wife depending entirely on the care of the Lord. In his wanderings he
was directed by the Spirit to those who had heard the Gospel and he
hastened to Fayette where he was baptized.

About a month after the conference the Lord revealed through Joseph
that Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson should go on a mission with
Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., to preach the Gospel to the
Lamanites. This was the first time that men bearing the holy Priesthood
went forth to preach the word since the time of the Apostles of Jesus.
Tens of thousands have now been bearers of the same glad message.

They set out preaching where they had a chance and distributing Books
of Mormon to many honest souls. They visited the Cattarugus Indians,
near Buffalo, New York, and then made their way to Kirtland, Ohio. Here
they met Sidney Rigdon, who less than two years before had baptized
Elder Pratt into the Reformed Baptist church. They gave him a Book
of Mormon. He read it and believed and immediately sacrificed his
profitable employment as minister to join the Church.

Others came forward in great numbers and were baptized. Worthy men
among the converts were given the Priesthood, and among these were
Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight and Frederick G. Williams. The last named
went with the brethren on their mission to the West.

After spending two or three weeks at Kirtland they journeyed on,
passing through, as they went, many hardships and strange adventures.
They preached to the Wyandots, a tribe of Indians living in Ohio, and
to many white people, and at length reached Independence, Jackson
county, a small town on the western border of Missouri. They passed
on into what is now the State of Kansas and preached to the Delaware
Indians until expelled by government agents. Then they took up their
labors in and about Jackson county, little knowing at the time that
here should be the center stake of Zion and the holy city.



CHAPTER XIII.

1830-1831.

THE WESTWARD MOVE BEGINS--KIRTLAND--THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD
CONFERRED--JOSEPH GOES TO MISSOURI--ZION DEDICATED.

When the brethren had set out on their mission to the West, Joseph
busied himself in his work at Fayette. Men were coming to him from
time to time to learn what the Lord desired of them and through him
revelations were given for their benefit. Other subjects were being
revealed and among them were matters of great importance to the Church.
Joseph also began the translation of the Bible in order that the
scripture, unchanged, might be given the Saints.

In December Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came to Fayette from
Kirtland to offer their services to the Lord. Edward Partridge had
heard the Gospel and believed, but had not been baptized. Joseph,
therefore, baptized him and ordained him an Elder. The word of the Lord
came unto Joseph calling these two men to labor in the ministry.

The Prophet was directed soon after this to leave off translating and
to spend his entire time in ministering to the Church and in preaching.
The Saints, who now numbered about seventy, in New York, were to leave
that State as soon as practicable and gather to Ohio. It was therefore
necessary for him to inspire them with faith for the trials of this
move and to give other honest souls a chance to join the Church.

On the 2nd of January, 1831, a conference was held at Fayette, being
the third since the Church was organized. It was a glorious time for
the assembled Saints, for besides the regular instruction a revelation
came from the Lord telling them that He would give them a land of
promise and that they should possess it eternally. He promised, too,
that He would come at a future day and rule as King.

According to the instruction of the Lord, Joseph set out from Fayette
in the latter part of January for Ohio. The Saints were to follow in
the spring, and it was necessary to find out the conditions and prepare
for them. He was accompanied by his wife and by Sidney Rigdon and
Edward Partridge. They all reached Kirtland in safety and immediately
after, on February 4th, 1831, according to a revelation, Joseph
ordained Edward Partridge to be the first Bishop in the Church.

The Prophet now made his home with Newel K. Whitney and occupied
himself in translating the scriptures, receiving revelation, discerning
and casting out false spirits and guiding the Church. Since the Prophet
obtained so many revelations now it might be well to describe how one
was given. Parley P. Pratt and others say that it was dictated by
Joseph to the person writing, slowly and distinctly, sentence after
sentence. When one part was spoken the Prophet paused until it was
written. If written correctly it seemed to vanish from his mind and
the next was spoken. If a mistake was made by the scribe, the Prophet
did not go on until it was corrected. There was no hesitation in going
forward, and no changes were made after the revelation was written.

A conference of the Church was held at Kirtland June 6, 1831, and all
the Elders and Saints that could be gathered together were present. The
Holy Ghost was made manifest in its workings upon the Prophet and many
of the Elders. The spirit of evil was also shown to be present, but as
soon as discerned it was rebuked in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
vanished. The High Priesthood, a degree of the Melchizedek higher than
the Elder, was conferred for the first time on a number of faithful men.

On the day after the Kirtland conference the Prophet was directed to
set apart a number of the Elders for missionary work. They were to
travel westward two by two until they reached Missouri, preaching
the Gospel on the way. It was promised that the next conference of
the Church would be held in Missouri on the land that the Lord had
appointed for Zion. About thirty Elders were called, only two of these
being sent eastward.

On the nineteenth day of June, 1831, Joseph left Kirtland for the West
in company with Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, Joseph
Coe, W. W. Phelps, and A. S. Gilbert and wife. They crossed the State
of Ohio by stage and boats and took steamer from Cincinnati down the
Ohio river to Louisville, Kentucky. After a delay of three days they
again sailed down the Ohio to the Mississippi and up that river to St.
Louis. The party divided here; Joseph and Elders Partridge, Harris,
Phelps and Coe crossed Missouri to Independence, Jackson county, by
foot, and the others sailed up the Missouri river.

The meeting between Joseph and Oliver and the Elders with each was a
very happy one. For nine months they had been separated and now they
were united again, a thousand miles from where they parted. They saw
one another full of faith and zeal for the progress of the Lord's work,
and they wept with joy.

They stood upon the land of Zion, and realized that it was holy ground,
for here the new Jerusalem, the celestial city, shall be built. They
looked upon it, too, as the immediate gathering place of the Saints and
rejoiced at its goodliness. The land was a prairie of deep, fertile
soil and covered with a fragrant and many-colored growth of flowers.
Along the edges of the streams, timber in great abundance and variety
grew, and scattered among this was an underbrush and shrubbery that
bore grapes, nuts, crab-apples, persimmons and berries of all kinds.

The land was indeed beautiful, and was a fit gathering place for the
Saints. By their industry they would, if unmolested, build up a great
civilization there and make it indeed a Zion. The future seemed very
bright. Joseph and his companions knew that the Lord had promised the
land to His people as an eternal inheritance, but fortunately they did
not know of the deeds of violence, the murders and awful crimes to be
committed there before the Saints should build the holy city of peace.

August 2, 1831, under Joseph's direction, Sidney Rigdon dedicated the
land of Zion by prayer as the gathering place of the Saints, and at the
same time twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel, carried
and set in place a log for the first house to be built there. This was
twelve miles west of Independence, about where Kansas City, Missouri,
now stands. On the following day Joseph dedicated the spot where the
temple is to be built, a little west of Independence. Eight men were
present.

The fifth conference of the Church was held, as the Lord had promised,
in the land of Zion. It was on the 4th of August. The congregation was
made up mainly of the Saints who had come from Colesville, New York,
led by Newel Knight.

On August 9th, the Prophet and ten Elders set out down the Missouri
river in canoes, but on the third day Elder W. W. Phelps, saw Satan in
a frightful form riding on the waters, and it was revealed to Joseph
that they should not trust themselves on the river but travel on land.
In company with Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon the Prophet reached
Kirtland, August 27th, having been absent a little over two months and
having traveled two thousand miles, much of the distance on foot.



CHAPTER XIV.

1831-1832.

THE TWO STAKES--JOSEPH LIVES AT HIRAM--M'LELLIN TRIES TO WRITE A
REVELATION AND FAILS--THE APOSTATE, BOOTH, STIRS UP HATRED--JOSEPH
TARRED AND FEATHERED.

Joseph was now in Ohio, and for a number of years he made his home
there. The Saints were in two bodies; one part gathered about Kirtland,
a few miles from Lake Erie in the north-eastern corner of Ohio, and
the other about Independence on the western border of Missouri. It
was a journey of one thousand miles from one stake to the other and
yet for about eight years they were separated. Why did they remain
apart? Since that time the Saints have kept together. Now when they
have grown in strength and numbers, colonies go out and make homes in
Mexico and Canada and other places, and yet the headquarters of the
Church and most of the Saints are in Utah. Why did not all in Ohio
move to Missouri, the land which the Lord had said was Zion? He had
good reasons for keeping some of the Saints at Kirtland, and you will
understand them if you go on with this work.

Joseph was not rich, and though he could make money when he turned his
mind to business, yet the Lord needed his energy and time for work of
a good deal more importance. So instead of building himself a home he
went to live at the house of John Johnson at Hiram, Portage county,
about thirty-five miles south-east of Kirtland. Sidney Rigdon went with
him and together they worked on the translation of the Bible, Joseph
translating and Sidney writing.

But there were many other things to do besides translate. W. W. Phelps
was sent back to Missouri to begin publishing a monthly paper called
the _Evening and Morning Star_. Oliver Cowdery went back also taking
with him the revelations that Joseph had received, and the Prophet
was busy gathering them. Many special conferences were held, many
revelations were received, and much of the time was spent in preaching
the Gospel.

A special conference was held October 25th of this year, 1831, at
Orange, Cuyahoga county. There were present, twelve High Priests,
seventeen Elders, four Priests, three Teachers, and four Deacons,
besides a large congregation, so you see that most of the grades of the
Priesthood were represented. It is interesting to know that James A.
Garfield, who later became President of the United States, was born at
this place about three weeks after the conference was held.

One day during meeting Joseph had a revelation from the Lord. After it
was given those present began talking about revelations. It must have
seemed an easy thing to some of them for the Prophet to speak out what
the Lord was revealing to him, and they thought they could do it as
well as he. The Lord saw what was in their hearts and revealed through
Joseph that the wisest among them might try to make up a revelation.
Wm. E. McLellin considered that he was the wisest, and tried to write
a commandment, but he made a dismal failure. He could not imitate the
words of Jesus Christ even in the least of His commandments. After that
attempt all those who saw it felt sure that Joseph was a true Prophet.

When the Church was organized in 1830 the Lord did not command that
all the officers should be appointed at once. But as the knowledge and
needs of the people increased, He revealed the other offices in the
Church and Priesthood. Joseph was not immediately made President with
two counselors. For a long time there was no quorum of Twelve Apostles
or of Seventy. Men had to be proved, before they could be put into such
positions. When the proper time came Joseph was directed to fill up the
offices until at length the organization was complete.

It was nearly a year, you remember, after the organization of the
Church that Edward Partridge was called to be the first Bishop. He
went to Missouri and made his home with the Saints there, and Newel K.
Whitney was afterwards appointed, on December 4, 1831, to be Bishop at
Kirtland. At this time Joseph received a revelation telling what the
duties of Bishop are.

For a year and a half the Prophet had not been disturbed by mobs. When
he left Colesville the last time he began to enjoy some peace. But
Satan could not be idle very long while Joseph Smith was alive and
free, and an opportunity soon came to injure the Prophet. Ezra Booth
apostatized and began to lie about him and to fight the Church. The
truth is that Satan finds his best tools in the apostates. The devil,
you know, is one himself--he apostatized in heaven, and he knows well
how to use a person who has denied the faith.

This Ezra Booth had been a Methodist priest, but was converted by
seeing some one suddenly healed. He was like Simon, the sorcerer, who
offered the ancient Apostles money for the power to confer the Holy
Ghost. He wanted the Priesthood, not that he might bless people but
that he might smite them and compel them to believe and thus make a
great display. When he found that he must be humble and pure if he
obtained power in the Priesthood he left the Church and wrote false
letters to make the people hate Joseph.

Others at Hiram apostatized also and became very bitter enemies. They
were even filled with the spirit of murder that they might destroy the
servants of God--men cannot be worse than that.

Emma Smith had twin babies that she had adopted when they were only
nine days old. In the spring of 1832, when they were nearly a year old
they caught the measles. On the night of March 25th, Joseph sat up
with the sicker child until late and then lay down beside it on the
trundle-bed and fell asleep. A scream of "murder!" from Emma waked him.
He was in the hands of the mob and they were dragging him through the
door. He loosened one foot from their hold and kicked one ruffian in
the face and sent him sprawling down the door-step, with blood spurting
from his nose. But there were too many for him, and he could not get
free. They cursed him and choked him until he fainted.

When he came to, they were away from the house. Sidney Rigdon was lying
on the ground, where they had dragged him by the feet over the rough
ground. He was lying there as if dead. They held Joseph off the ground
so that he could not spring. They knew how strong and active he was.
The leaders of the mob were holding a council to decide what to do.

They brought a tar bucket and tried to push the paddle, all covered
with tar, into his mouth, but he twisted his head so that they could
only smear it over his lips and face. Then they tried to poison him
with nitric acid, but the bottle broke against his teeth and the acid
ran to the ground. But the most horrible thing was now to come. They
rent his clothes from his body and suddenly one fell upon him like a
fury and with his nails tore the Prophet's flesh, and taking God's name
in vain he said "That's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks." Then
they covered his body with tar, and fled.

Slowly Joseph made his way home to Father Johnson's house. When Emma
saw him she fainted. They gave him a blanket to cover himself and he
went into the room where friends were waiting with Emma. They spent
the rest of the night in cleaning the tar from his wounded body. Next
morning was the Sabbath, and he went to meeting. Standing up boldly
before some of the very men who had tried to murder him, he preached a
powerful sermon and in the afternoon baptized three persons.

The spirit of the mob did not die out, they continued to threaten and
vex the Prophet and those about him. Sidney was out of his head for
two or three days on account of being dragged over the frozen ground,
but as soon as he was well enough he hurried away with his sick family
from Hiram. One of Joseph's twin babies died from catching cold on that
dreadful night, and two days after its death, on the 1st of April,
Joseph left for Missouri, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Newel K.
Whitney, Peter Whitmer and Jesse Gauge. He arranged for Emma to stay at
Bishop Whitney's home.



CHAPTER XV.

1832-1833.

THE VISIT TO MISSOURI--JOSEPH POISONED--BRIGHAM YOUNG AND HEBER C.
KIMBALL COME TO KIRTLAND--PROPHECY OF CIVIL WAR--FIRST PRESIDENCY
ORGANIZED.

Joseph's visit to Missouri in the spring of 1832 was not alone to
escape the mob, although his life was in danger in Ohio. It seemed
necessary for him to see and encourage the Saints in Zion and to attend
to other matters.

The little party hurried away from Kirtland and the bad men who wished
to kill them followed. Thus they went until they reached Cincinnati,
when their enemies gave up the chase. On the journey the boat on which
the brethren rode caught fire twice, but no one was hurt. Joseph during
his life had many adventures.

Two days after reaching Independence, on the twenty-sixth of April a
general council of the Church was held, and Joseph Smith, Jr., was
sustained as President of the High Priesthood. The Prophet had been
ordained to this position at a conference in Amherst, Ohio, January 25,
1832, and when the Saints in Zion accepted him he stood at the head of
the Church as President. You remember that Joseph was accepted as first
Elder when the Church was organized and he had continued to preside
over and to lead it. But now the Lord desired to make the organization
more complete, and he was called to be President and Frederick G.
Williams to be counselor to him, though Elder Williams was not ordained
to this position until a year later.

While the Prophet was at Independence much other business was carried
on, and the most important of this was the order to print three
thousand copies of the Book of Commandments. This was the first book
containing the revelations from the Lord to the Prophet. At a later
time these were printed in the Doctrine and Covenants. At the same
conference Elders W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were
appointed to review and prepare for the press such revelations as
should be deemed proper for publication.

After a very pleasant two week's visit among the Saints Joseph departed
for home. His journey was made most of the way in a stage. The great
railroads now running through the states of Missouri, Illinois, Indiana
and Ohio were unheard of then. Only the year before, 1831, the first
engine and train of cars in America were run over a fifteen mile track
westward from the city of Baltimore in Maryland. So you see that it
took many days to go the distance that can be traveled in one day now,
and there was certainly far less comfort and perhaps even less safety
in traveling by stage than by railroad.

On this particular journey, while passing through the southern par
of Indiana, Joseph and his companions had a thrilling adventure and
serious accident. The stage horses became frightened and ran away. It
was very dangerous to remain inside, for the high coach was likely to
be tipped over and wrecked, and they also found it dangerous to get
out. Joseph and Bishop Whitney tried it, and Joseph reached the ground
safely. Bishop Whitney, however, was not so fortunate. His foot slipped
into the swiftly whirling wheel and the bones of his foot and leg were
twisted and broken, and then he dropped, limp and bleeding, into the
road.

Joseph took his friend to an inn at Greenville and for nearly a month
cared for him tenderly. At the end of this time the Prophet rose one
day from the table, walked to the door and began vomiting frightfully.
Blood and poison came up, and so violent was the retching that his jaw
was thrown out of place, and the poison acted so powerfully on him that
it loosened his hair. With his own hands he replaced his jaw and then
hurried to Bishop Whitney's bed. Bishop Whitney laid his hands upon his
head and rebuked the evil power that was afflicting him, and instantly
he was completely healed.

But what was to be done now? Bishop Whitney had not yet been able to
move his broken leg from the bed and of course the Prophet would not
leave him. He walked into a grove near by to think. About him were
fresh graves. He had seen them before but now he knew what they meant.
Suddenly the inspiration of the Lord came upon him and he hurried back
to the inn.

He told Brother Whitney that if he would agree to set out in the
morning a wagon would take them to the river where a ferry would be
waiting to cross. Here a hack would carry them to the landing, where
a boat would be just ready to sail. By eleven o'clock they should be
going up the river and would at length reach home in safety. Bishop
Whitney's faith was strong and he agreed.

They left the inn next morning and all happened just as the Prophet
had said, though he had made no arrangements and knew nothing of
the times of sailing. Bishop Whitney was very glad that he had been
willing to accept the promises of the Lord punctually. If he had waited
until evening or the next morning or until his foot was well, there
might have been two more new graves in the wood near Porter's inn at
Greenville, Indiana.

After Joseph reached Kirtland he busied himself with the translation of
the scriptures and the many, many duties that filled his life and made
it such a busy one. He was receiving important revelations, writing
letters, organizing and teaching a school for the faithful Elders at
Kirtland, called the School of the Prophets, preaching the Gospel, and
providing for his family. You may well believe he was busy.

In the fall he took a short trip east with Bishop Whitney and visited
Albany, New York and Boston. When he returned, Nov. 6, 1832, he found
that a baby boy had just come to his home a few hours before. This was
the first of his own children that lived and he named it after himself,
Joseph Smith. The Prophet builded great hopes upon this boy, but they
have not been realized.

Two days after he reached home, he was working in the woods chopping
down trees when two strangers came to him. They were large, noble
looking men, and a little older than he. Their names were Brigham Young
and Heber C. Kimball. There in the forest these three men of God met,
with the beautiful leaves of autumn above them, and no kings ever came
together under a canopy of cloth of gold that were so great or so good
or so important as they.

Brigham and Heber had traveled three hundred miles by team to see
Joseph and they were not disappointed. Joseph with his prophetic eye
saw that they were mighty spirits, and he knew and said that Brigham
would sometime preside over the Church. While they were still together
the gift of tongues came upon Brigham and he spoke. It was the first
time Joseph had ever heard the gift, and he was filled with joy. He
understood the meaning of what Brigham had spoken, and said it was
the language used by Adam and those who lived before God confused the
tongues of the builders at the tower of Babel.

Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were both born in Vermont, Joseph's
native state, in June, 1801, Brigham's birthday being the first of
the month and Heber's the fourteenth. Both moved to New York, as did
Joseph, and there heard the Gospel. April 14, 1832, Brother Young
was baptized, and on the following day Brother Kimball came into the
Church. After their visit to Joseph they returned home to arrange their
affairs in order to gather with the Saints.

During the winter the Prophet received a number of important
revelations. One was given Christmas day, 1832, concerning war.
Joseph prophesied that there should be a rebellion beginning in South
Carolina, which should lead to a war between the Northern and the
Southern States. He said that the Southern States should call on Great
Britain, that slaves should rise against their masters and be trained
for war, and death and misery should come to many souls.

Just twenty-eight years after this, in December, 1860, South Carolina
withdrew from the Union and other states followed. On the twelfth of
April, 1861, in South Carolina began the rebellion in awful earnest by
the Southern soldiers firing on Fort Sumter. The Southern States did
call on Great Britain, and began the war relying on that nation's aid,
although they did not receive the help expected. President Lincoln in a
proclamation September 22, 1862, said that all slaves should be free,
and many were then trained as soldiers to fight their Southern masters.
The war did cause the utmost death and misery--about one million men
were slain, and how many millions were left in misery and sorrow! And
thus was fulfilled to the letter what God had shown to His servant
Joseph, and Joseph had spoken to the world.

Another revelation that you have heard much about was given in
February. It is what we call the Word of Wisdom. If the children of men
would only obey this Word, how much knowledge and health and happiness
and beauty we should have, and how little sorrow and ugliness and crime!

When Joseph was accepted as President of the Church, you remember that
Frederick G. Williams was called to be a counselor, and later Sidney
Rigdon was also named by the Lord. At a meeting of the School of the
Prophets, March 18, 1833, Joseph set these two men apart; Sidney as
first counselor and Frederick as second. The presiding quorum of the
Church was now complete and Jesus and a host of angels appeared before
the faithful Elders present to show that God was pleased.



CHAPTER XVI.

1833.

TROUBLE BEGINS IN MISSOURI--THE ELDERS PRAY, THE MOB GETS DRUNK--JULY
MOB DESTROYS PRINTING-OFFICE AND TAR AND FEATHER THE BRETHREN--THE
SAINTS PROMISE TO LEAVE--APPEAL TO GOVERNOR.

Almost in the center of the United States is Missouri, one of the most
fruitful states of the Mississippi valley. It is a beautiful land
with its dales and hills and woodland. The great Missouri river flows
through it and the mighty Mississippi, passing by its eastern side,
carries its grains and other products to the sea.

It has had a wonderful past, but its future will be more wonderful.
Father Adam lived in that land with Mother Eve in their innocence, and
they lived there after their transgression. In this day God commanded
His Saints to gather there soon after the organization of the Church.
They obeyed, but were soon robbed and scourged, some killed and the
rest driven away. Later, when the Civil War came, more blood was
spilled, and the worst form of war was there, because the people were
divided and slew one another.

But the future of the state of Missouri is the most interesting for
us. If the Latter-day Saints obey the commandments of the Lord He will
soon begin to prepare the land of Zion for them, just as He would have
prepared the land of promise by sending hornets before Israel, if
Israel had been faithful. There in Jackson county the holy city will be
set up as the capital of God's kingdom.

On the sixth of April, 1833, the Missouri Saints, thinking of the happy
future, came together on the bank of the Big Blue river to celebrate
the birthday of the Church. It was just the opening of spring and all
about them was beautiful. They were happy, for by hard work they were
making themselves prosperous. They owned their homes, and though they
were poor, yet the prospects for all were very bright.

God in His wisdom does not permit us always to see what is before us.
If those Saints could have looked upon the dark, gloomy years ahead,
they would have been sad indeed. Soon after the meeting of the sixth
of April a mob of about three hundred men collected in Independence to
make a plan to drive away the Saints. They thought it right on such
an occasion to drink a good deal of liquor so that their very worst
feelings might rule, but they were too generous with themselves. They
became drunk and broke up in a general fight. A few of the leading
Elders met together when the mob assembled and prayed that they should
do nothing to harm the Saints. This prayer, you see, was answered.

No more was done by the mob until July, and then through the efforts
of ministers and those who called themselves religious men, the people
were again stirred up. Minister Pixley was one of the most zealous
liars among the enemies of the Saints, and it was greatly due to
him that they renewed their persecution. On the twentieth of July a
mass-meeting was held, and among the five hundred men present were some
of the prominent officials of the state.

Col. Richard Simpson was chairman and Col. Samuel D Lucas was one of
the secretaries. The meeting resolved that no more Mormons should come
into Jackson county, that the Mormons there should sell their property
and move out, that the _Evening and Morning Star_ should be published
no longer, and that those who would not obey this order should be
referred to their brethren who had "the gift of divination and of
unknown tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them."

The main reasons given for these resolutions were that the Saints were
poor, they were growing in numbers, and the mob feared they were what
in those days were called abolitionists, that is, those who wished the
government to stop men from holding slaves. The Saints were from the
East and North. They of course held no slaves and hated the system of
slavery. And yet they were moderate. The constitution permitted men to
hold slaves and the Saints had no desire or intention to run over the
constitution.

In those days the people of the South were very jealous of their
right to hold the black men, and looked with great suspicion on the
Northerners. This was shown during the persecution of the Saints in
Missouri, and as the Prophet Joseph foretold, it grew and grew until it
ended in a bloody war.

A committee of twelve was appointed by the meeting to see the leading
Elders and report in two hours whether they would accept the terms or
not. Truly the mob were expecting much when they demanded that four or
five men should agree in about one hour's time that one thousand two
hundred souls should be driven from their homes.

Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Sidney Gilbert and others were seen
by the committee, but the brethren asked for more time. The committee
refused and returned to the meeting. When the mob heard their report it
was decided by a vote of all to destroy the printing office and steal
the press and type. They went to Elder Phelps' house where the printing
was carried on, drove his family into the street although Sister Phelps
was nursing a sick baby, and then tore down the house. They stole
press, type and paper and all else they wanted, and destroyed the rest.

These Missouri ruffians doubtless enjoyed this very much, but it
did not satisfy them, they wanted a little rougher sport, and their
pleasure was the pain and suffering of others. They found Bishop
Partridge at his home, dragged him to the court-house, and tarred
and feathered him, because he would not deny the faith or leave the
country. Elder Charles Allen suffered the same treatment. With the
tar was mixed some acid, unslaked lime or lye, and it burned into the
flesh. But these brethren were so filled with the love of God that thev
felt no hate or bitterness toward their enemies.

Lieutenant Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, who was next to the highest
officer in the state, saw all this lawlessness and outrage, and when it
was done he coolly said to the Saints, "You now know what our Jackson
boys can do, and you must leave the country."

Three days later, on July 23rd, the mob met again, armed and carrying
a red flag like a band of anarchists that they were. The Saints knew
that bloodshed would follow if they did not consent to leave, so they
promised that half would go by January 1, 1834, and the other half by
the first of the next April, and the committee for the mob said that no
more violence should be done them.

Oliver Cowdery was immediately sent to Kirtland as a messenger to
Joseph and the Saints there, and sometime later W. W. Phelps and Orson
Hyde were sent to Jefferson City to ask Governor Daniel Dunklin for
help. They told him of the things you have just read about and the many
other threats and injuries the Saints had suffered. He said that the
attorney-general of the state, the man whose duty it is to advise on
points of law, was absent, but when he returned the governor promised
to write an answer.

About a month after the petition was written, the governor's answer
reached the Saints at Independence. He said that no citizens have a
right to take the law into their own hands. "Such conduct strikes at
the very existence of society and subverts the foundation on which
it is based." But he said that he could not persuade himself that
any portion of the citizens of Missouri needed force to teach them
this. Governor Dunklin should have looked more closely at the written
statements of the mob, which Elders Phelps and Hyde enclosed in the
petition. The mob's words were: "Intending as we do to rid our society
(of the Mormons), peaceably if we can, _forcibly if we must_, we deem
it of the highest importance to form ourselves into a company for the
better and easier accomplishment of our purpose." This same statement
was repeated in other words.

The governor advised the Saints to have their enemies arrested and
tried by law in the ordinary way. He said that justices of the peace
could issue warrants. But the trouble was that they would not.
Throughout Governor Dunklin's term of office he filled his letters
with patriotic words, but he did not restore the Saints to their homes
and rights. He was perhaps sincere in his desire to do right, but he
lacked vigor and strength and waited for extraordinary troubles to
mend themselves in an ordinary way instead of doing his duty bravely
and with determination. At least, Governor Dunklin was not the lawless
brute that was Lilburn W. Boggs who became governor after him.



CHAPTER XVII.

1833.

THE MISSOURI SAINTS HIRE LAWYERS AND THE MOB FORMS--NIGHT ATTACK ON BIG
BLUE BRANCH--TWO DAYS OF CRUELTY AND PLUNDER--THE BATTLE--SAINTS GIVE
UP ARMS.

The Saints in Jackson county, taking the advice of the governor,
prepared to try by the common methods of law to gain their rights, and
they relied on his promise to use force if these means failed. They
hired four prominent lawyers and paid them one thousand dollars for
their work. How glad we are that they did this! They showed that they
loved peace and were seeking it by all means in their power. And this
is one more testimony against Missouri.

But at the time, this action of the Saints only made matters worse.
Lawyers Wood, Reese, Doniphan and Atchison, wrote under date of October
30, 1833, agreeing to work for the Saints, and on the night of the
following day, as soon as the news had spread, the mob came together.
There was a branch of the Church on the west bank of the Big Blue river
and this the mob chose to attack.

It was night, and the little lone settlement off in the wilderness was
at peace. Suddenly fifty armed men whose hearts were full of cruelty
appeared and before the Saints could gather to defend themselves it
was too late. They broke into the houses, cursing people with awful
oaths. The children and their mothers were terrified and ran out into
the darkness to hide in the brush with the wild beasts. The fathers
could not even go with them, but were caught and whipped and knocked
down with clubs. When the bleak morning came they crept back, but their
houses were torn down, their homes ruined.

Gray, cheerless November had come. The voices of the wind and storm
were loud and boisterous. The signs of winter were fast appearing.
At such a season it was pleasant to gather in the evening about the
blazing, crackling fire in the great, open hearth and enjoy its
cheerfulness. But this was not the lot of the Saints in Zion.

Night after night without ruth nor mercy the mob broke into the homes
and drove out men and women, the sick and aged, and little children,
and sometimes not daring to go into the houses themselves, the cowards
threw stones through the windows. So you see when the Saints went to
bed they knew not what horrible scene might be before them when they
awoke. How earnestly those little children must have prayed for God to
keep them safe during their sleep, and when morning came for Him to
guard them through the day! Do you think you are as earnest in your
prayers?

On the night of November 1st, the mob was very busy. The men were
divided into groups of fifteen or twenty who went about breaking into
houses and thrusting poles through the windows. Another body of men,
who loved to fill their pockets with stolen goods better than hear the
screams of frightened children, gathered about Gilbert & Whitney's
store. They burst in through three doors and took what they wished, and
scattered other goods about the streets.

When a little band of brethren came up to stop the robbery nearly all
the mob scampered off like sneak-thieves, though one of them named
Richard McCarty was captured. The brethren took him before Justice of
the Peace Samuel Weston, but this officer would issue no warrant for
his arrest, and so he was set free, although he was caught in the very
act of the crime.

On the next day the Saints in Independence left their homes and camped
out together on the prairie, taking as many of the things that were
left as they could carry. The mob, therefore, went to the settlement on
the Big Blue river to continue their work. In one house David Bennet
lay sick. If the mob had been made up of the wildest men of the darkest
jungle of Africa they could hardly have been more savage. They dragged
him from his bed, almost beat him to death and shot him in the head
with a pistol, but the injury was not fatal. One of the mob was wounded
that night, perhaps by one of his companions, but it was blamed upon
the Saints, of course.

Upon hearing of this the enemy grew very angry. The Saints had been so
long-suffering that they were no longer expected to use the right of
every human being to defend himself. The mob said openly that Monday
would be a bloody day. Many of the leaders were religious men, and were
required to be at Sunday service. Perhaps because they did not wish to
miss anything, the murder was put off until Monday instead of being
carried out at once.

This general slaughter was probably prevented by the determination of
the brethren that they would fight, if fight they must. A company of
thirty carrying seventeen guns met sixty of the mob who had turned
their horses in Whitmer's cornfield and were hunting a little body
of brethren who had fled. The mob cursed and opened fire, wounding a
number of the Saints. The fire was quickly returned and two of the mob
fell dead, and the rest, leaving their horses and dead companions,
broke into flight.

Two of the brethren, Andrew Barber and Philo Dibble, were wounded
very seriously. Philo Dibble was healed by the blessing of God and
lived to come to Utah with the Saints. He passed away only recently.
Brother Barber died next day and he became the first martyr in this
dispensation--unless we call the little foster-babe of Joseph's a
martyr. It died, you remember, from the effects of mob violence.

How different was Brother Barber's death from that of the two
mobocrats! He gave his life in defense of his brethren, and greater
love than that no man hath. The others died while trying to murder
innocent men. And when the brethren went to them as they lay dead and
deserted in their own blood, they were filled with strange feelings,
for they remembered what one of these, Hugh Brazeale, had said during
his life: "With ten fellows I will wade to my knees in blood, but that
I will drive the Mormons from Jackson county."

This battle took place about sunset. Rumors were at once hurried off to
all parts of the country with all manner of false reports, such as that
the Mormons had taken Independence and were joined by the Indians from
across the border. The people rose in arms. Some prepared to come in
the morning, others gathered in Independence that night.

They ordered the arrest of Sidney Gilbert and others who had caught the
thief McCarty the preceding Friday night, charging them with assault.
Of course they knew that this was not justice--it was the easiest
method of persecution. While the brethren were being tried, the mob
gathered and cursed and made the worst threats, and the prisoners were
taken to jail to save their lives. They were fired on but were not hit,
and the next morning were all set free.

On this day, Tuesday, the 5th of November, one of the greatest wrongs
ever done to a body of citizens in the United States took place.
Lieutenant-Governor Boggs organized the mob into state militia and
placed them under Colonel Pitcher, one of the bitterest enemies of
the Saints. This man called for all the fire arms the Saints owned,
and took them away, directly contrary to the second amendment of the
constitution of the United States. He ordered the Church to go from the
county at once and to give up the men who took part in the battle the
day before to be tried for murder.

The Saints, not wishing to resist the authority of the state and
believing that Lieutenant-Governor Boggs was an honorable man instead
of the traitor and murderer they found him to be, did not resist.
They relied on his false promise that the arms should be taken from
their enemies as well. But, of course, this was never intended. The
Saints were deceived. They gave up the only thing that kept the mob
from falling upon them. But what an example they set! They preferred
to suffer wrong rather than do wrong. Their religion was the Gospel of
peace. They had the courage of martyrs, the bravery of heroes, and yet
throughout all the Missouri persecution they fought only as the last
means of saving wives and children and friends.



CHAPTER XVIII.

1833-1834.

NEW STRUGGLE OF OLD WAR--MOB TURNED LOOSE ON SAINTS--THE TERRIBLE
DRIVING--APPEALS TO DUNKLIN AND JACKSON--MOB AND SAINTS HOLD CONFERENCE.

Long, long ago, before we were born, before any man on earth was born,
a great and terrible war was fought. This was in Heaven, between God,
our Eternal and Heavenly Father, and a disobedient son, who lusted
after more power. The army of the Lord was stronger, whipped Lucifer
and his angels and cast them down to hell.

Some on the Lord's side were very valiant, brave spirits, others were
not so brave; and some, perhaps, followed the Lord merely because He
was more powerful and not because of real love for Him. These last,
when placed on earth, are easy tools for Satan, and whenever God sets
up His work, Lucifer uses them in his efforts to destroy it.

This struggle in Missouri was just a new battle of the old war, and
it seemed as though Satan's tools were very thick there and were of
the worst kind. In one sense the evil one was victor. The Saints were
driven from Jackson county, and then from place to place until they
fled from the state to save their lives. And yet the Lord's power is
far greater than Satan's, and if He had willed it, the persecution
would not have taken place; but He let it go on because the Saints did
not obey all His laws and prepare themselves to build up the holy city.

When, according to Col. Pitcher's order, the weapons of the people
were given up, the mob--now state soldiers--acted like a legion of
devils. They rushed in companies on foot and horseback from place to
place, stealing, pulling down houses, threatening to murder women and
children, and tying men to trees and beating them. Ministers took an
active part, and Rev. Isaac McCoy with his gun on his shoulder led one
band.

Out on the wild prairie scattered all who could escape, and there they
wandered, homeless and torn from their loved ones. Darkness came, and
through the crisp air of the November night the stars shone down upon
their misery. A few halted at dawn on the bank of the Missouri river
and little by little their numbers grew. Each day more came to join
them at the ferry, bringing what they could carry from their ruined
homes.

A great part of the Saints crossed the river into Clay county, some
went into Van Buren and Lafayette counties and some scattered in other
directions. Jackson proved not the only county where unkindness was
known. And almost all the Saints except those in Clay were driven
again. The people in Clay did show some Christian feeling and let the
Saints remain.

About a week after the terrible attack of the mob militia, before dawn
on the morning of November 13th, all the heavens began to glow with
splendid light. Stars shot from their places, leaving behind them a
radiant train. All the colors of the rainbow were seen. It was like the
most magnificent play of the northern lights. The Saints could easily
see this glorious sight--few had roofs over their heads to prevent.
They rejoiced, for they took it as a sign of God's glory, and it
certainly was. Their enemies saw it also, and they, believing like the
Saints that the Lord of hosts was showing His power, were terrified.

Just as soon as the leading brethren could cross the river, they
sent out a sworn statement of all that the mob had done, to Governor
Dunklin. He ordered a special court of inquiry to be held at once. This
was done and Col. Pitcher was arrested for court-martial because he had
taken the arms from the Saints.

The governor said he would restore the Saints to their homes by force
if they wished it, but that he could not keep soldiers there to protect
them. They themselves had no weapons, and of course did not care to go
back and be butchered by the mob. They asked to be organized into a
militia, but though this was legal it was never done.

They sent petitions to President Andrew Jackson, asking that the
United States troops might be stationed in Jackson county to protect
them. The soldiers had to be placed along the frontier somewhere, and
the Saints thought if placed there, the mob would not dare do any
violence. The president would not interfere, saying he had no authority
to act in this case. On other occasions President Jackson was not so
particular about authority when he wanted to carry out his plans. What
an exhibition of weakness in our government! The governor of Missouri
and the president of the United States both seemed willing to do what
the law would permit, and yet over one thousand people were driven from
their homes and kept away, although they used all the lawful means to
regain them.

It was a terrible winter for the Saints in Missouri. All the comforts
they had gathered about them were gone. They not only were without
proper shelter from the storms but even lacked food. And while they
were in this condition, across the Missouri river the mobs were tearing
down and burning their empty houses and destroying their harvested
crops. During one week in the spring of 1834, one hundred and fifty
homes were consumed by fire.

In the latter part of February a regular court of inquiry was held
in Jackson county, and about a dozen of the brethren were called as
witnesses. A company of state soldiers went out with them as a guard.
No sooner had they reached Independence, however, than a strong mob
gathered and they were hurried back to Clay county without going into
court at all. Blood would certainly have been spilled if they had
stayed.

The court found Col. Pitcher guilty of calling out the militia to
crush an uprising when there was no uprising to crush, and of making
the Saints give up their arms when they were at peace. When Governor
Dunklin received this report he ordered that the arms be returned. His
orders were not regarded, and here is where his weakness was shown--a
strong man would have enforced his own proper commands. Instead of
being given back, the arms were divided among the mob, and the Saints
never did obtain them.

On the day following the entrance into Missouri of Zion's Camp, of
which you are later to hear much, on the 5th of June, 1834, the
brethren wrote to Governor Dunklin telling him that the Saints were
ready to be taken back to their homes in Jackson county. You remember
that he had promised to protect them until they were again settled but
no longer. They had now obtained new arms, Zion's Camp was coming to
help them, and they believed that they could now protect themselves if
the mob should rise again to hurt them.

In answering, the governor said that a clearer right did not exist
than that of the "Mormon" people, who were exiled from their homes
in Jackson county, to return and live on their lands. But instead of
raising troops to go back with the Saints, he tried to persuade them to
come to some terms with their enemies.

Through the efforts of him and other prominent men a meeting was held
on the 16th of June in Clay county between members of the mob and
members of the Church. Different proposals were made but none were
accepted. The mob offered to buy the lands of the Saints if they would
promise that no "Mormon" should ever come back, but God had commanded
them to build Zion there, and they could not promise that. The Saints
offered to buy the lands of all those who did not wish to live in the
same county with them, but this did not suit the mob. The meeting grew
very exciting and ended by one of the mob stabbing another.

It was an important gathering, for though no agreement was reached it
showed the governor his plain duty. But excitement and mystery were
in the air. Zion's Camp was near and the people did not know what to
expect.



CHAPTER XIX.

1833-1834.

FOUNDATION OF THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE LAID--JOSEPH GOES ON MISSION TO
CANADA--FIRST HIGH COUNCIL FORMED--ZION'S CAMP GATHERED--WILFORD
WOODRUFF A MEMBER.

During the year of trouble in Missouri, the Prophet Joseph Smith was
not idle. He could not be with the western Saints to share their
suffering, but he sent them many letters bearing counsel and the word
of the Lord when it came to him. He did not stay away on account of
fear. Once when he heard of the terrible cruelties of the mob his
generous heart was so moved that he wept aloud, "O, my brethren, my
brethren, would that I had been with you to share your fate. Almighty
God, what shall we do in such a trial as this!" Much evil is spoken of
Joseph Smith, but even his enemies say he was brave.

On the 23rd of July, 1833, the very day, you remember, that the mob,
carrying a red flag, gathered in Independence to make the Saints
promise to leave the country, the foundation stones of the Lord's house
were laid at Kirtland. In a former chapter you were told that the Lord
had a good reason for having part of the Church at Kirtland and part in
Missouri. You probably begin now to see what it is.

In the autumn of 1833 Joseph went on a missionary journey to New York
and Canada in company with Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson. They
left Kirtland October 5th and were gone just a month. Almost every
day they had a chance to preach and sometimes to baptize. Their work
was very successful, for they not only gained souls at the time but
prepared the ground for a future harvest.

One night way up there in Canada they held a meeting in the village of
Colburn. The snow fell heavily, but in spite of this the people came
together. It was a humble room lighted by flickering candles. Joseph
and Sidney tried to tell the people the message of life eternal, but
one man was there who made up his mind that they should fail. He was a
Wesleyan Methodist. When the meeting had begun he became very noisy. He
talked in a loud voice, but there was no sense in what he said. Joseph
and Sidney replied to him in an earnest, quiet way, speaking words of
truth and wisdom instead of falsehood as he had done, and of course
they overcame him.

At Mount Pleasant sixteen persons were baptized in two days, and the
signs promised by Jesus did follow the believers. The Holy Ghost rested
upon them, and under its influence one sister spoke in tongues. The
Saints were all glad when they saw that this was the same dear old
Gospel that our Savior preached.

When the Prophet returned to Kirtland he sent many messages to the
brethren and sisters in Missouri, but he himself was kept in Ohio,
and it was a very busy winter for him. In December Oliver Cowdery and
Bishop Whitney brought to Kirtland a new printing press, for although
the Saints could not publish the _Evening and Morning Star_ in Jackson
county, they did not intend to stop printing entirely. The new press
was set up. It was decided to publish the _Star_ again, and Oliver
Cowdery was made editor. The office was dedicated December 18th.

On the 17th of February, 1834, the first High Council of the Church was
formed at Kirtland. This was made up of twelve High Priests, and Joseph
and his two counselors presided over it. The purpose of such a body was
to try those who commit sin, for their standing in the Church, and also
that the Saints would have no need of going to law when any difficulty
arose among them. These men holding the Priesthood were called to hear
and discuss all cases, and then the president made his decision. If a
mistake was found in this, it could be changed. In ordinary trials two
members were appointed, one to speak on each side. If the case was more
difficult two were to speak on each side, and if very important three,
but no more than three could ever speak on a side.

Since that time many High Councils have been formed, and now, as you
all know, every stake in Zion has one. The President of the Church
can no longer preside because he has too many other duties, but the
president of each stake holds the position in the council of his stake.
These are very important because there are no money charges, and poor
men can have justice, as all men can, for the judgments are given
according to the laws of God.

Soon after this work was done Joseph began to seek volunteers for a
journey to Missouri. The Lord had commanded him in a revelation to
gather the young men and the middle-aged and to receive donations of
money from the Saints. He promised that if faith and purity were shown
by His people He would redeem Zion, and the money was taken that new
purchases of land might be made, and those in distress aided.

Joseph started in on this work February 26, 1834. He and Parley P.
Pratt traveled eastward from place to place, preaching and telling the
Saints that the Lord wished volunteers and money. They were successful
in many places. Sidney Rigdon and others went out also. They returned
after a month's work.

Soon after they reached Kirtland Joseph was called into court as
a witness against Doctor P. Hurlburt, an apostate, who had been
threatening to kill him. Of course it was a very unpleasant thing
for the Prophet and still there was nothing else to do. This man was
found guilty of threatening to murder, and on the 9th of April he was
put under two-hundred dollar bonds to keep the peace, and fined three
hundred dollars--to pay the costs of the court.

During the rest of this month Joseph was holding meetings and preparing
for Zion's Camp, as the men, who went to Missouri at this time, are
called. On the 1st of May over twenty men with four baggage wagons were
ready to leave Kirtland. They set out and traveled about fifty miles,
to New Portage, where they waited until the others came up.

President Wilford Woodruff was in this first party. He had been
baptized on the last day of the year 1833, at Richland, New York, and
on April 25th he came to Kirtland as a volunteer. Some of you readers
have probably heard him tell of his meeting Joseph and how he lent the
Prophet his sword to carry to Missouri as the leader of Zion's Camp.
President Woodruff served faithfully in this mission as he did on every
other during his life, and the friendship that began then between him
and Joseph will last throughout eternity.

Two days after the first party left Kirtland Joseph followed with the
main body of the Camp. When the two joined they numbered over one
hundred and fifty men. Joseph at once began to organize his little
band. Companies of twelve were formed, and each chose its own captain,
who gave the men under him their special duties. General officers were
also appointed.

The twenty wagons taken by the Camp were heavily loaded with provisions
and such things as the poor Saints in Missouri needed. No room was left
for the men; they had to walk along at the side. They had their guns,
pistols and other weapons, but these were only for self-defense. This
was a body of the Priesthood, called by God to go out, not for conquest
or plunder, but to protect and minister comfort to those in great need.



CHAPTER XX.

1834.

ZION'S CAMP ON THE WAY--MIRACLE OF BRINGING FORTH WATER--ZELPH, THE
WHITE LAMANITE--REBELLION IN THE CAMP--STOP FOR THE NIGHT ON FISHING
RIVER--CAMPBELL'S THREAT--THE MOB AROUSED.

On the evening of the 8th of May, 1834, Zion's Camp slowly made its
way into a beautiful grove at the end of its first day's journey. Each
captain chose a camping spot for his company, the firemen builded
up crackling fires, the cooks began to prepare food, the horsemen
unhitched the horses and tended them, the watermen brought pure water
from the brook, the tentmakers pitched the tents and the runners went
on errands or carried messages. You see that each man had his own work
and all was orderly.

After supper was over and darkness had come, the Camp gathered about
the fires--for the spring air was chilly--and talked of the great work
before them. They may have looked up at the glorious stars and thought
of the splendor and the power of the One who made these great bodies
and set them in their place, and rejoiced that they were giving up much
to do His work.

Suddenly a trumpet sounded, the hour of prayer and sleep had come. In
a moment each man was on his knees thanking God for the blessings of
the day, asking Him for the blessings of the night, praying Him for the
suffering Saints of Zion, for His work everywhere, and for the loved
ones at home. Then they lay down to rest and the Camp of Zion was still.

When the spring morning dawned, before the sun rose over the Ohio
hills, the men were again astir, each busy at his own work. Again the
trumpet sounded and again each kneeled and offered prayer. Breakfast
was prepared and eaten, the horses were hitched to the wagons and at a
given signal the Camp moved forward on its way.

And thus they went, filled for the most part with zeal and brotherly
love, and willing to endure all things. Sometimes they walked in the
heat of the day until their feet bled. Often their enemies were thick
about them, and guards had to be set at night to keep the Camp from
those who would fall upon it in the darkness. But angels traveled with
them, as the Lord had promised, and they saw them. Their enemies were
often frightened and at one place counted five hundred, although at the
time the Camp numbered less than two hundred men.

The blessings of the Lord were shown in many other ways. Once, at the
end of a hot June day, they pitched their tents on a broad, treeless
prairie, over which they had traveled all day long. They were very
thirsty, for the plain had no water upon it and the supply they carried
had been gone since morning. When Joseph saw the suffering about him
he called for a spade, and picking out a place which all could easily
reach, he dug a shallow well. Water at once flowed into it and the two
hundred men and fifty or more horses and mules drank from it. Plenty of
water was in the well as long as the Camp stayed there.

Perhaps you have read about the children of Israel thirsting in the
wilderness and grumbling sorely at Moses. At the Lord's command he
struck a rock with his rod and water poured forth and all Israel drank
of it. But Moses committed sin here, for he spoke as if he and Aaron
had done this instead of giving God the glory.

This miracle was more showy than the one in Zion's Camp but it was in
one sense no greater. The brethren were not complaining and they did
not need to be startled by some sudden sign. But the Lord made the
water flow in both cases to give His children drink, and I believe the
men of Zion's Camp were more truly thankful than were the Israelites.

Just before the Camp passed from Illinois across the Mississippi river
into Missouri, Joseph with Brigham Young and others went up on one of
the mounds in the neighborhood to obtain a view of the great river,
called the Father of Waters. Here they found an altar built according
to the ancient style, and from its foot they dug up the skeleton of a
man. They were surprised to find an arrow-head between the ribs. It was
revealed to the Prophet that this was the remains of Zelph, a white
Lamanite and a mighty man of God, who had fought as a chieftain under
the Prophet Omandagus. He was killed in battle during the last great
struggle of the Lamanites and Nephites. Of course we know it was not in
the last battle of the struggle because that was fought around the Hill
Cumorah. What a glorious gift is the inspiration of God!

It was not until the Camp had crossed the Mississippi that any trouble
arose. Of course enemies had often been near, rivers were often deep,
roads were often long and rough, but these were all from without--God
would protect and care for His servants in such conditions and they
could not, therefore, be called troubles. But now real trouble came; it
was sin within the Camp, and God would not protect them from that. Only
their union and faith had secured their safety in the past. Sylvester
Smith openly rebelled against Joseph and the order of the Camp and
others joined with him. The Prophet warned them that the Lord would
punish with a heavy scourge, and He did.

As soon as they reached Missouri, Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight came with
volunteers to join them, and the Camp now numbered two hundred and
five men, with twenty-five heavily laden wagons. For a few days they
remained at Salt river to rest, and here Lyman Wight was made their
general. Twenty men were also picked out, with Hyrum as captain, to
be a body-guard to the Prophet, for they were now in a country where
different men had sworn they would murder him.

After this little rest the Camp traveled on until July 18th, when they
stopped for the night one mile from Richmond, Ray county. They expected
here to meet an army of their enemies, as the mob had threatened to lie
in wait for them at this place. But at daylight the next morning the
Camp passed quietly through the town before the people were awake.

They had not gone far on the prairie before a wagon broke down. They
stopped and repaired it, but had hardly started again when a wheel
ran off another wagon. And so it went all day long. At night, instead
of being over in Clay county, as they had hoped to be, they were only
on the Fishing river in Ray. This was a small stream flowing into the
Missouri and at this point was divided into seven branches. Between two
of these, on a high piece of ground, they halted and prepared to spend
the night.

Soon after they stopped, five armed men rode up and said, with many an
oath, that the Camp should see hell before morning. Sixty men, they
said, were coming from Richmond and seventy from Clay county, and they
had sworn utterly to destroy the Camp. With this warning they rode
away. The afternoon had been very fair, but as night came on black
clouds rose from the west and covered the whole sky.

You ought now to know what was going on outside of Zion's Camp. No
doubt you remember the meeting between the Jackson county Saints and
the Jackson county mob that was held in Clay county, June 16, 1834.
Governor Dunklin and other men wished the Saints to give way and sell
their land, but this they would not do, and the meeting was broken up
by a stabbing affair in the mob.

James Campbell and Samuel C. Owens, with ten other angry men, left the
meeting, jumped into a boat and began to row across the Missouri. They
wished to reach Jackson county in order to raise an army to lead out
against Zion's Camp. James Campbell, while strapping on his pistols
before starting, said, with a bold swagger, "The eagles and turkey
buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and his army so
that their skins will not hold shucks, before two days are passed."

How little this man thought of his fate when he spoke these terrible
words! That night the angel of death overturned the boat in the middle
of the river. James Campbell and six others were drowned and the rest
barely escaped with their lives. Samuel Owens floated four miles down
stream and landed on an island. Early in the morning he stripped off
his clothes and swam to the Jackson shore where he borrowed a garment
to cover his nakedness and, as Joseph says, "slipped home rather shy of
the vengeance of God." James Campbell's skeleton was found on a pile of
drift-wood in the river three weeks later and the birds of prey had in
reality torn off and eaten his flesh.

But there were plenty of men left in Jackson county to call the mob to
arms. This misfortune was no lesson to them. They rode over the county
telling the men that the "Mormon" army had come and they would have to
turn out to meet it. This was a welcome message, for these were the
wild, lawless spirits always found on the frontier. They were used to
spilling blood, and they thought themselves very bold and brave. And so
they gathered at the appointed time on the bank of the Missouri, armed
with dirks and pistols and guns, hoping to kill Joseph Smith and his
followers and secure the plunder.



CHAPTER XXI.

THE TERRIBLE TEMPEST ON FISHING RIVER--VISIT OF COL. SCONCE--CHOLERA IN
CAMP--JOSEPH SMITTEN--SIDNEY GILBERT'S DEATH--PROPHET VISITS ZION.

Shortly before sunset on the 19th of July, 1834, two hundred armed
men stood on the southern bank of the Missouri river ready to cross.
Seventy armed men waited for them on the opposite shore, and sixty
more, also armed, were marching from Richmond, Ray county, to meet
them. Many of these were ruffians of the worst stripe; they had tied
up innocent men and whipped them almost to death, they had frightened
women and children out into the darkness and cold, and torn down or
burned their houses. Some of them were murderers and all now had murder
in their hearts.

A few miles away was another band of two hundred men, just at this time
pitching their tents and preparing to spend the night. These had some
weapons also, but were not so heavily armed as were the others. What
they had, however, were near at hand and ready for use, for an attack
was expected at any moment.

This was a body of God-fearing men, who had come from afar, bringing
food to the hungry and clothing to those in need. They hoped also to
help their brethren and sisters home to their lands in Jackson county.
These men held the Priesthood of the Lord of hosts; they had come
at His command; they would not have harmed an animal purposely, and
certainly not a human being; but they were determined not to be robbed
and killed, and they were ready to fight to the death in self-defense.

If God in His wisdom had seen fit to let the mob come on, blood
would have flowed like water and martyr and murderer would have died
together. But He had another fate for His servants than to die there
at the hands of blood-thirsty Missourians. This was the hour to show
His power. He spoke to the winds and they went rushing over the
whole heaven, bearing the black clouds that gathered at His call. He
commanded the lightning and the rain and the hail, and they obeyed.

Within a few miles of the Camp of Zion on every side, the hurricane
raged. The great hail-storm beat down fields of corn and cut off
branches from the trees, and the wind in many places twisted the trunks
to splinters. Lightning flashed through the heaven all night long in
great zigzag streaks, thunder crashed, and the earth shook.

The puny, weak creatures that had a few hours before defied God's work
lost all their boldness and quailed at the sight of His anger. The
rain wet them to the skin and spoiled their ammunition. The hail cut
holes through their clothing and bruised their bodies. All who could,
ran to their homes or hunted nearer shelter. Forty of the two hundred
from Jackson county had crossed the Missouri and the boat had gone back
for more when the storm came up. Of course the forty were very anxious
to go back home then, but they could not swim the great river, and so
spent the night with the storm beating down upon them, thinking over
their own bad lives.

In Zion's Camp no hail fell, and there was little wind and rain. A
few tents were blown down and some of the brethren were wet. Many
found shelter in an old meeting house, and Joseph sent them to pay
for the use of this on the following day. The storm did not frighten
the brethren. They knew the Lord had raised it, not to harm them but
to keep them from harm. When morning came they found great streams of
water flowing between them and their enemies. Big Fishing river which
was only ankle deep the night before was now forty feet in depth, and
men from the mob said that Little Fishing river rose thirty feet in
thirty minutes.

That day the Camp moved about five miles to a place where it would be
harder to attack them, and stayed three days. While there, Colonel
Sconce with two other men rode up. They came into the Camp, and when
they were face to face with Joseph and the brethren the officer
trembled so much that he could not stand up. After his nervousness had
somewhat passed away he rose and asked what the Camp intended to do. He
said he had led armed men from Ray county to fall upon the Camp, but
the storm had driven him back, and he knew that an Almighty Power was
protecting this people.

The Prophet answered him. He said that the Camp had come one thousand
miles to bring supplies to their friends and to help them back to their
homes. They hated bloodshed and their firearms were brought only to
defend themselves. They intended to obey all laws and harm nobody. He
told the sad story of the pitiful sufferings of the Jackson county
Saints, and when he ended Colonel Sconce and his friends were in tears.
These men were like Paul, the Apostle; they had tried to destroy the
truth, believing it was evil. As soon as they learned that they had
done wrong they sought to undo it. They rode over the country and told
the people the truth about Joseph Smith and his followers.

Cornelius Gillium, sheriff of Clay county, also visited them, and
after learning why they had come he told them about the people and
the country and advised them how to avoid trouble. After leaving, Mr.
Gillium published a true report of what he had learned.

Again on the twenty-third of June the Camp moved, now going toward
Liberty, Clay county. Before they reached the town General Atchison,
who, as you know, was employed by the Jackson Saints as lawyer, met
them. He with other leading men came out to urge Joseph not to pass
through Liberty, as they feared trouble. Of course it would have been
silly after this warning to run chances of rousing a mob, so the Camp
turned, passed by Liberty, and pitched their tents that night at the
end of their journey, on Rush creek, among the Saints.

You remember that when Sylvester Smith and others rebelled against the
Prophet, about three weeks before this, Joseph told them the Lord would
scourge the Camp. And now the scourge came in the form of cholera.
Two or three cases had appeared as a kind of warning before the Camp
reached Rush creek and Joseph foretold what would come. He said he was
sorry, but he could not help it.

On the following day, June 24th, the terrible disease broke out in
earnest and continued four days. There were about sixty-eight cases,
and thirteen persons died. Elder John S. Carter tried to rebuke the
disease, but it at once seized him and he died. Joseph laid on hands
and commanded it to depart from one of those afflicted. The disease did
leave but came upon the Prophet. At the same time Hyrum was struck down.

Three times they kneeled and prayed for their lives, and the last time
they made up their minds to keep on until they were healed. While they
were pleading with the Lord, Hyrum saw in vision their mother back in
Kirtland praying for her absent boys. God listened to her prayer and
theirs, and they rose up well and strong again.

The Prophet learned a great lesson at this time. He knew that the Lord
was going to punish the Camp in this way and he should not have tried
to interfere with the Lord's purposes by using his Priesthood to hinder
them.

Among those who died was Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who had charge of
the Lord's store-house. He was an able, useful man, and had shown much
bravery in the Jackson county troubles, but now he brought his own
death upon him. The Prophet called him to go with others to Kirtland
and after receiving his endowments to go on a mission. Brother Gilbert
had suffered much from those outside the Church and was filled with a
wrong spirit toward them. He answered that he would rather die than
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. God took him at his word, the
cholera came upon him and he died.

These were terrible days. Men who were standing guard about the Camp
fell down at their posts, and groans from those in agony came from all
sides. Many faithful men suffered as well as some who were to blame
for the scourge. But the true and obedient ones who were smitten will
have their reward. The Camp was not united, therefore it was punished.
At last a cure was found for the disease, and that was to put a person
into cold water or pour it over him.

But while the cholera was still raging in the Camp, excitement and
unrest were running high outside. To stop this Joseph announced
publicly that he would disband those who had come to Missouri with him,
and this he did on the twenty-fifth of June, 1834, nearly two months
after the first party left Kirtland. The Prophet knew, too, for the
Lord revealed it to him, that though the Camp had been successful in
bringing food and clothing to the Saints, it could not help them back
to their homes. The Church in Missouri had failed to keep the saintly
union and faith that must be possessed by those who build up and
inherit the center stake of Zion.

On the first of July Joseph crossed the Missouri with some of the
brethren and went to Independence. He saw the same land that the Lord
had dedicated as Zion three years before, now entirely in the hands of
the wicked. It must have made him sad, but he did not lose courage. It
was not the part of a fearful man to go into Jackson county as Joseph
did. True, he was not known very well in that neighborhood, but if he
had been recognized it would probably have meant death.

Two days later he organized a High Council in Clay county, for the
Saints in Missouri. This was formed like the Council at Kirtland, only
David Whitmer and two counselors presided in place of the Presidency of
the Church. After visiting another week among the Saints the Prophet
set out for home. He reached Kirtland alone about the first of August,
after a wearisome journey and after three months of hardest toil and of
most valuable experience.



CHAPTER XXII.

1834-36.

A TIME OF PEACE BEGINS--BUILDING THE TEMPLE AT KIRTLAND--THE TWELVE
APOSTLES CHOSEN--FIRST QUORUM OF SEVENTY ORGANIZED--JOSEPH TRANSLATES
PEARL OF GREAT PRICE--WILLIAM SMITH'S SIN.

Much sorrow was felt by the Church because Zion's Camp was not
permitted to help the Saints back to Jackson county, and thus redeem
Zion--and yet no one was sorry that the brethren had gone to Missouri.
It was soon seen that this journey was a trial for certain men before
they were called to be Seventies and Twelve Apostles. Perhaps also on
account of the willingness of so many and the sufferings they went
through, the Lord blessed the Church for three years with much peace.

This was a time when mighty things were done. The Priesthood was more
fully organized, the temple was dedicated and the Gospel began to
spread more rapidly. Soon after the Prophet Joseph came to Kirtland
he sent forth Elders and Priests and he himself went for a short time
to Michigan. With Hyrum and others he set out by steamer on Lake
Erie, and while on their way they had a laughable experience. One of
the passengers named Elmer told them he knew Joe Smith very well,
and he was glad now that he was dead. He said Joe Smith was a dark
complexioned man, and he had heard him preach his lies in Bainbridge,
New York, five years before. That man was a pretty bad liar himself.
Joseph was not dead; he was light complexioned; he had not begun
preaching five years before, and he had never been in Bainbridge.

During the fall and winter much work was done on the temple at
Kirtland. The people were very poor, but they did their best, as the
Saints have done in Utah--when they had no money to help on the Lord's
work they gave their labor and their time. Joseph worked as foreman of
the stone quarry, and Hyrum, Brigham, Heber, and others took up their
humble toil with him.

Besides this work, High Council meetings were held very often, and the
School of the Prophets was begun again. It was a busy time for Joseph,
but he had this motto, and he made it a rule for his future life, "When
the Lord commanded, do it." By obeying the Lord without delay he was
able to do much more work than if he had put things off, just as you
boys and girls can do more work by obeying your fathers and mothers at
once.

One Sabbath afternoon in February, 1835, Brigham and Joseph Young came
to the Prophet's house after meeting to sing for him. They had very
sweet voices and he loved to hear their hymns. After they had sung,
he told them that he had seen the glory of those men who had died of
cholera in Zion's Camp and their reward was very great. They talked
over the journey to Zion, and Joseph wept. The Spirit of the Lord came
upon him and he said that the Twelve Apostles were to be chosen and
Brigham should be one of them. He said also to Joseph Young, "The Lord
has made you President of the Seventies."

That week the Prophet called a meeting of all who went with Zion's
Camp, on the 14th of February. Fifty-six of these men and many other
Saints came together. Joseph told them that the time had come when the
Twelve Apostles should be chosen and if the Saints were willing, the
three witnesses to the Book of Mormon would pick them out. In one of
the early chapters you were told who these men are, but if you have
forgotten, look them up and read their testimonies in the forepart of
your Book of Mormon.

The Saints voted for them to do it. Each one prayed that God would pour
down His Spirit upon them that they might know and do His will. Then
they named these twelve men: Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham
Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. McLellin, Parley P.
Pratt, Luke Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton and
Lyman E. Johnson. This was not the order at the time, but the Prophet
arranged them later according to age, the eldest being first. Now, you
know, the Apostles stand in the quorum according to the time they were
appointed and the president is the one who has been longest an Apostle.

The Church had been organized nearly five years now, but as you have
seen in other matters the Lord was in no hurry to fill up all the
offices at once. He in His wisdom chose the time. And yet the calling
of the Apostles was no new thought with the Prophet. Even before the
Church was organized it was revealed that there should be twelve like
the Apostles that were with Jesus.

There was a greater need for the Twelve at this time than there had
been before, because now the great missionary movement was beginning,
and the work of the Apostles is to direct this. Besides there were now
in the Church men who could be trusted with this office, and though six
of the first twelve were not faithful, the other half remained true
and held their positions when they died and will hold them throughout
eternity.

On the last day of this same month of February, forty-five members
of Zion's Camp were chosen as the beginning of the first quorum of
Seventy. Among these were George A. Smith, Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph
Young and Levi W. Hancock. Brother Smith became later an Apostle,
Brother Grant a counselor to President Young, and the other two were
presidents of the Seventy quorums throughout the Church.

The Seventies were called to go out and preach the Gospel under the
direction of the Twelve Apostles, just as the Seventy in ancient times
were sent out by Jesus. When this degree of the Priesthood was begun
the organization of the Church was almost completed, and so when you
say that the Church was organized April 6, 1830, remember that it was
only partly organized then.

In the early days of May the Apostles started on their missions. They
were absent half a year and not only preached but gave much attention
to forming conferences. As time passed by they learned their duties and
responsibilities. The Prophet Joseph said shortly after their return:
"The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency,
and where I am not there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." This
is one of the most important doctrines in the Church; when Joseph died
Sidney Rigdon was not the rightful leader; the Twelve Apostles stood at
the head of the Church.

During the summer of 1835 a man came to Kirtland with four mummies and
some rolls of Egyptian writing. These had been found in a great tomb
way off in Egypt, and it seems almost by accident had been brought to
the Prophet, and yet of course the Lord was guiding them. Joseph took
the rolls of Egyptian paper and translated the writing better than
any of the learned men who had tried before. The owner, Mr. Chandler,
gave him a certificate that his translation agreed with theirs but was
fuller. Some of the brethren bought the mummies, and Joseph by the aid
of the Spirit of God translated the writing and it was later printed in
the Pearl of Great Price.

Soon after the Twelve returned from their mission, a very sad thing
happened. William Smith, Joseph's brother and one of the Apostles, grew
angry at the Prophet over a small matter in a High Council meeting and
disturbed the meeting and hurt Joseph's feelings by his unruly conduct.
He repented but not very thoroughly, for two weeks later while Joseph
was visiting at his house he again grew angry, and struck and injured
him. On the 1st of January, 1836, a meeting was held by Joseph, Hyrum,
William and their father and uncle. William's feelings were again
softened and he asked Joseph's forgiveness and this Joseph gladly gave.
The Prophet was always ready to go more than half way to gain peace and
good feeling, and if we grow like him and like Jesus we must do the
same.



CHAPTER XXIII.

1836.

THE PROPHET'S GROWTH IN KNOWLEDGE--GLORIOUS VISIONS IN THE
TEMPLE--DEDICATION--KEYS OF THIS DISPENSATION CONFERRED--ELDERS GO OUT
TO PREACH.

Do you remember in one of the early chapters of this book it was said
that when Joseph began translating the Book of Mormon he could not
spell so well as an ordinary schoolboy of these days? His ignorance was
not because he was dull or lazy. His energies were spent in the field
and forest, and he did not live among people that wrote much or had
much knowledge of books. Just as soon though as he began spending his
time in the Lord's service, his learning grew very fast.

In translating the Book of Mormon Joseph was in the best school a man
could attend. The Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of intelligence,
inspired his mind, and he read and understood a strange language
entirely different from our own. When he finished this work he probably
had more knowledge of the Egyptian writing than any other man living.
The work on the Book of Mormon gave him also a better grasp and
understanding of English, and caused within him a thirst for learning
that was never quenched. His work in rewriting the Bible helped him
very much, and when he translated the books and writings of Abraham
and Moses from the Egyptian found on the papyrus with the mummies, he
was a well educated man. He understood much concerning the movement
of stars and heavenly bodies, and more important, he knew that in the
past many of them were worlds like ours and are now as ours will be.
He understood how people should be governed. And the highest knowledge
of all--he knew our Father in Heaven, better than did any one else on
earth.

Think what a blessing this last is! If a bright boy works with an
intelligent man whom he admires very much, it is not long until he
begins to look at matters just as his older friend does. When that
friend is the Lord and the boy is any righteous human being, this same
thing happens, only when we look at matters as the Lord looks at them
we are not led astray by the opinions of men, but we see the absolute,
the whole truth.

The Prophet was now a man thirty years old, and yet with all the other
duties he found time to go to school. He studied a number of subjects
but was perhaps most interested in Hebrew. A fine Jewish scholar was
employed to teach the brethren at Kirtland, and this man said he had
never seen a class learn so quickly. The Prophet loved education and
true knowledge, and even in the hardest troubles found time to study.
He set the example, children, every one of you follow it through life.
Study hard and learn all that is true and good and beautiful, and your
lives will be far more happy and far more useful.

We have come now to one of the great reasons why God did not direct all
of His Saints to go to Missouri but kept a part of them for a number of
years in Kirtland. He permitted some to go to Jackson county and buy
land there and begin to build up Zion. The Saints were not righteous
enough to prevail against the persecutions of their enemies and were
driven away from their land. But the feeling was left in their hearts
and in the hearts of their children and in the hearts of all true
Latter-day Saints that we have a claim on Jackson county, and it will
be the greatest joy of our lives to go back and redeem Zion in the
Lord's own time.

Now our Father in Heaven in His mercy kept some of the Saints in
Kirtland where they could build a temple to Him and receive the holy
endowments and blessings that had been given to few people on earth.

It was in July, 1833, that the corner stones of this first temple built
in latter days were laid. March 27, 1836, was the day on which it was
dedicated, so you see that less than three years were used in building
it. The Salt Lake temple was forty years being built, but it is far
larger and more costly than was the one at Kirtland.

Before the dedication many glorious things took place that prepared
the leading Elders and the Prophet for the great event. One night in
the latter part of January the First Presidency and some of the Elders
from Missouri as well as from Kirtland came together for the purpose of
anointing one another. Joseph and his counselors first poured oil on
the head of Joseph Smith, Sen., the Patriarch of the Church, and he in
turn blessed them.

But the anointings were not the only matters of importance that took
place in the unfinished temple that winter night. Angels drew aside the
curtains of heaven, and the host that dwelled there and our Redeemer
Jesus were seen. The Elders shouted hosannah and glory to God in the
highest, and their souls were filled with infinite joy. The Prophet saw
in visions the celestial kingdom of God, and the flaming gates through
which the heirs of the kingdom will enter. He saw the glorious throne
whereon the Father and Son were seated. He beheld within the beautiful
city Fathers Adam and Abraham, his own parents and his brother Alvin
who had died years before.

He was astonished to see his brother there, because he had passed away
before the Gospel was restored, but the Lord declared that all who had
died without hearing the Gospel, who would have accepted it if they had
heard it will be heirs to the celestial kingdom. Alvin was not enjoying
celestial glory at the time of this vision. The Prophet was of course
beholding the future, as at this time his parents were both alive, but
the doctrine of baptism for the dead had not been revealed, and so
the Lord answered him in this way. The explanation is perfectly true.
Honest, pure souls who have died without a knowledge of the Gospel are
heirs to the kingdom. And yet they can not enter it until baptism has
been performed by their relatives or friends here on earth.

The glorious meeting did not end until two o'clock in the morning, and
the next night the Elders again met. The Twelve Apostles and presidents
of Seventies also met with them and received their anointings and
blessings. Once more angels ministered unto them and mingled their
voices in shouts of praise. The gift of tongues came upon the Elders
and they had another spiritual feast. A week later High Priests,
Seventies and Elders assembled to be blessed and anointed, and like
visions and glorious signs were shown unto them.

Early Sunday morning on the twenty-seventh of March, 1836, the Saints
of Kirtland with those who had come from Missouri and other places
for the occasion made their way to the House of the Lord. They waited
patiently until eight o'clock, when the doors were opened and they were
received and seated by the Prophet, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon.
Less than a thousand could enter, for the building was not very large.
At nine, when the presiding authorities were seated on each end of
the room, the services began. They sang hymns, prayers were offered,
Sidney and others preached and the congregation voted to sustain the
authorities. President Joseph Smith offered the prayer of dedication,
and this was sealed by the shout from all the Saints repeated three
times, "Hosannah, hosannah, hosannah to God and the Lamb. Amen, amen,
amen."

After this there was more speaking. Brigham Young and David Patten
addressed the Saints in tongues, and George A. Smith rose and
prophesied. Then was heard a rushing like the noise of a mighty wind,
and a bright pillar of fire rested on the temple. Angels filled the
room and were seen. The whole body of Saints rose to their feet and
some spoke in tongues and some prophesied, and some saw glorious
visions of eternity. The people of the neighborhood, hearing the
rushing sound and seeing the pillar of light, were astonished and ran
to the temple to see this strange thing. That night at eleven o'clock
the Saints went home and the dedication of the House of the Lord, the
first temple of the latter days was completed.

On March 29th, the Prophet with his counselors and some other Elders
met in the holiest place of the temple. There they fasted and prayed
and washed each other's feet until morning, when they met with all
the officers of the Church holding the Melchizedek Priesthood.
The ordinance of the washing of feet was carried out through the
whole assembly, the sacrament was administered, and Joseph told the
Priesthood their various duties. At nine o'clock in the evening Joseph
went home to rest after a most joyful night and day and left the
meeting in the hands of the Apostles. During the night the gift of
tongues came to some, angels appeared to others, and others, still more
blessed, saw the Savior.

On the following Sunday, the third of April, during afternoon meeting
in the temple, Joseph and Oliver drew the curtains of the pulpit, thus
closing them from the congregation, and kneeled in silent prayer.
When they arose they beheld the Lord standing on the breastwork of
the pulpit which seemed to be overlaid with pure gold. His hair was
white as snow, His face was brighter than the noonday sun, and His
eyes were like flames of fire. He told them that He had accepted the
temple and spoke many blessings on the children of men. His voice was
like the rushing of great waters. After this vision ended, Moses came
and committed unto them the keys of the gathering of Israel, then
Elias gave the dispensation of the Gospel of Abraham; and Elijah, the
Prophet, who was carried to Heaven in a chariot of fire, conferred
the keys of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children and the
hearts of the children to the fathers.

These great keys are necessary in this dispensation of the Gospel, for
this is to be the fullness of times, when all that has been in the
past will be brought back to make the Gospel perfect. Do you wonder
why Oliver was with Joseph instead of Sidney Rigdon, or Frederick
G. Williams? Oliver had been ordained by Joseph to be an assistant
president and so he was at this time of equal rank with them.

During these days of jubilee the Twelve Apostles and worthy Elders
received their endowments in the temple and then scattered out into the
ever-widening fields of missionary work. Joseph also went out and spent
two months in gathering the blessed harvest.



CHAPTER XXIV.

1836.

THE SAINTS IN CLAY COUNTY--CITIZENS ASK THEM TO LEAVE--CALDWELL COUNTY
FORMED--JOHN TAYLOR--LORENZO SNOW--WILLARD RICHARDS.

While the winds of bleak November, in the fall of 1833, were howling
through the forest, stripping from the branches the few remaining
leaves, twelve hundred robbed and beaten souls made their way from the
ashes of their former home down to the banks of the Missouri river.
They crossed, carrying over the things they could save, and placed
themselves on the mercy of the people on the other side. Their landing
place was Clay county and the inhabitants proved to be kind--something
new for the Saints to meet in western Missouri.

The Clay county people showed considerable sympathy for the strangers
during this winter, and permitted them to make their home with them.
For three years the Saints were there, hoping all the time to return to
Jackson county and using all lawful means--from trials in a justice's
court to an appeal to the President of the United States--to gain their
homes and rights. All efforts seemed to be useless. Governor Dunklin
was as weak as a child, and more trouble seemed to be growing. The Clay
county people thought that the Saints could never go back and that
if they did not go away somewhere at once, civil war would arise. In
those days feeling was very bitter between slave holders and those who
did not hold slaves. The Saints were not slave holders, and they were
coming into Missouri very fast. The Missourians held slaves and were
very jealous of the strangers. Then their religion, though the purest
and best in the world, held them from the sympathy of their neighbors.
It did look as though war might begin between the Saints and their
enemies, for though our people would have made no attack, they would
have defended their wives and children to the death.

On the 29th of June, 1836, the citizens of Clay county held a meeting
and adopted resolutions asking the Saints to leave. They did it in a
gentle manner, saying that they had no right to command the Saints
to go, but asked it for the good of all. They suggested that our
people move to Wisconsin or some other place where they could be by
themselves, but they did not expect them to set out before they had
sold their property without loss. They offered to help them find a
place and appointed a committee to raise funds to aid the poor. They
also promised to use their influence in causing persecution to cease.

A number of prominent men carried these resolutions to the Saints, and
two days later the leading Elders met and acted on them. They agreed
to leave, but declared that they were innocent of any lawlessness or
crime whatever. They thanked the people of Clay for their kindness in
the past and for their offer of help, and in accepting the resolutions
asking them to leave, they offered their act as a covenant of peace
between the two people forever. What could show more gratitude? Clay
county had been kind to them, though no kinder than one Christian
should be to another. But the Saints--they were leaving their homes and
moving into the barren wilderness to repay that kindness.

Word was at once sent to the Prophet at Kirtland, and he with his
counselors wrote letters to the Saints and to the citizens of Clay.
He told our people that they should sell their property at as small
a sacrifice as possible, defend their families in case of attack,
and stand by the Constitution of our country. The letter to the Clay
county citizens was an eloquent defense of the Missouri Saints. It was
free from bitterness, though filled with deep sorrow that the innocent
people should again find it necessary through the lies of their enemies
to become homeless wanderers.

Less than three months after they had consented to leave, the Saints
were on the move. They did not go up into Wisconsin, but found a region
in the northern part of Ray county where they could settle. Seven men
who gathered the honey of wild bees lived there, but they were willing
to sell out, since the honey was about gone. The settlement was made
along Shoal creek, and though the country was not fertile or beautiful,
the Saints knew it would become so through their labors and the
blessing of God.

By December so many had come that they prayed the legislature to make a
new county of the Shoal creek district. This was done, and it was named
Caldwell. By April of the year 1837 a townsite for Far West had been
chosen and surveyed, and lots were put up for sale. In July the ground
was broken and prepared for the building of a temple. It was never
finished; Missouri was not worthy of a temple then, but not long hence
and the great House of God will be built there. In November, Far West
was enlarged to include two square miles, and by this time the country
was being rapidly settled and put under cultivation.

While the Saints in Missouri were showing the world an example of
courage and industry seldom equaled, matters were not at a standstill
at Kirtland. Few years in the history of the Church had been happier
than the year 1836--the temple was dedicated, the Elders endowed and
sent out to preach, Joseph went on a successful mission to the east,
and converts were being made very fast. Among these were John Taylor,
Lorenzo Snow and Willard Richards.

Elder Taylor received the truth from Parley P. Pratt who had been sent
to Toronto, Canada. Previous to starting upon this mission, Heber C.
Kimball, filled with the spirit of prophecy, came to Brother Pratt's
house one night, woke him up, and made a prediction concerning the
success that would attend him. He also promised that if he obeyed, his
wife would be healed and bear a son. Brother Pratt did obey, and this
was all fulfilled. Elder Taylor had been a Methodist minister, but
refused to stop preaching what he believed to be true, and was reduced
to the position of a member. After a thorough investigation of the
Gospel he was baptized and never once wavered in his faith. John Taylor
was born November 1, 1808, in Milinthorpe, England. He received a good
education and when only seventeen years old he became a preacher. He
came to America when he was about twenty-four, and settled in Canada,
where he heard and accepted the Gospel.

Lorenzo Snow was born April 3, 1814, in Mantua, Portage county, Ohio.
He was on his way to Oberlin college when he was first impressed with
the Gospel. He happened to meet David W. Patten, and in talking with
him grew much interested in religious ideas. After Elder Snow had
finished his work at college, on the advice of his sister, Eliza R.
Snow, who had already joined the Church, he came to Kirtland to study
Hebrew. Soon after this he became convinced of the truth of the Gospel,
and joined the Church. He was baptized by Apostle John F. Boynton, in
June, 1836, and not long after was ordained an Elder and began his life
work in the ministry of our Savior.

Dr. Willard Richards, who became an Apostle and also second counselor
to Brigham Young, was baptized on the last day of the year 1836.
Heber C. Kimball and others spent the afternoon in chopping a large
hole in the ice, and Brigham Young performed the ceremony. Brother
Richards first heard of the Gospel when he happened to pick up and open
carelessly a Book of Mormon. Before he read half a page he declared,
"God or the devil had a hand in that book, for man never wrote it." He
read it twice in about ten days and then, after selling his medicine
and settling his accounts, traveled seven hundred miles to Kirtland to
study the Gospel more closely. He soon came to the knowledge of the
truth and asked for baptism though in the dead of winter.

And thus the fruitful boughs were being found and they soon brought
forth blossoms that ripened into richest harvest.



CHAPTER XXV.

1836-37.

THE SPIRIT OF SPECULATION--KIRTLAND SAFETY SOCIETY BEGINS AND
FAILS--MANY APOSTATIZE--THE ENGLISH MISSION OPENED--SATAN STRIKES HEBER
C. KIMBALL, BUT FAILS TO STOP THE WORK.

For some time previous to the year 1837 there was a fever raging over
the United States. It was not a sickness that hurt the body, but the
fever to buy for little and sell for much, and thus grow suddenly
rich. It was the fever of speculation. Railroad engines had just been
invented and were so successful that almost everybody who had money
or could borrow it wished to buy railroad stock and make his fortune
at once. People began moving out westward to the fertile lands of the
Mississippi valley, and those who could lay their hands on money bought
large tracts of land, hoping by the rise of prices to make immense
profits. At this time, too, President Andrew Jackson, in order to
destroy the national bank, took away the public money and placed it
in private banks. This made it easier to borrow and speculation was
consequently increased.

In 1836 the Prophet Joseph and other leading men of the Church,
desiring to aid the business of the Saints in a proper way, established
a kind of bank called the Kirtland Safety Society. In the beginning of
1837 actual business was started up and for a time all went well. But
after a while the spirit of the land seized many of the brethren and
they began to speculate wildly. Joseph saw that this would lead to evil
and ruin, and he gave them serious warning. At length, unwilling to
support anything that was not carried on in righteousness, he broke off
all connection with the society.

The natural result of the speculation in this country came in 1837.
It was a financial crash such as the people of the United States have
never known at any other time. Land and railroad stock and other kinds
of property would rise no higher in price and began to come down. Men
grew frightened and tried to sell, but others were frightened and would
not buy, so those who held the stocks were ruined, as most speculators
are sooner or later. Many banks failed because they had used the money
that people had put in and could not pay it back. The Kirtland Safety
Society also failed. Warren Parrish had stolen twenty thousand dollars
or more from it, and other apostates and enemies of the Church fought
against it. Many of the brethren, however, spent all they had to pay
its debts.

This speculation and the failure and ruin that followed it, caused many
men to apostatize from the Church and become bitter enemies to Joseph.
He had warned them, but the lust for riches had filled their souls,
driving out the Spirit of God, and they rejected his counsel. Yet the
Prophet was blamed for the failure of the bank, when this was caused by
their own mistakes and dishonesty.

Kirtland seemed to be, and no doubt was, filled with devils who were
making every effort to overthrow the Church. It was at this time
that the Lord directed Joseph to call Heber C. Kimball on a mission
to England. Of course Brother Kimball accepted this new work. He
was a man that never flinched before a duty. Orson Hyde and Willard
Richards, learning that he was called, asked to be sent also. On the
thirteenth of June, 1837, they departed from Kirtland, and on July 1st,
accompanied by John Goodson, Isaac Russell, John Snider and Joseph
Fielding, sailed from New York.

The good ship _Garrick_ carried them safely across the great Atlantic,
and just as the anchor was being lowered in the river Mersey, on the
morning of July 20th, up sailed the _South America_, which left New
York at the same time under a bet of ten thousand dollars. So you see
the ship that carried the Elders won. Some of the brethren hastened to
shore in a row-boat, and when they drew near, Heber C. Kimball with a
great spring reached the landing and stood upon the soil of England,
the first man bearing the holy Priesthood to set foot upon a foreign
land in this dispensation.

The Elders were now at Liverpool, but they took stage at once for
Preston, about thirty miles distant. As they alighted from the coach,
they found themselves beneath a waving flag on which was written,
"Truth will prevail." Queen Victoria had just been seated on the
throne, and an election was being held for members of Parliament. The
flag was in honor of the event, but the brethren took it as a sign of
comfort for them and hoped and believed with all their hearts that the
words would be fulfilled.

Sunday morning, July 23rd, Rev. James Fielding, brother of Joseph
Fielding, gave it out in his meeting that some ministers from America
would speak in the afternoon at his chapel. The brethren had not asked
this favor and were very grateful for the offer. Elders Kimball and
Hyde spoke, and another meeting was held at night. A third meeting was
held the following Wednesday night and then Mr. Fielding closed his
doors to the Elders. They met, however, at private houses and the work
was not hindered. Only a week had passed when nine persons were ready
for baptism.

That morning Elder Russell was to speak, but upon arising from his bed
he was so afflicted with evil spirits that he felt he would die unless
relieved. He came to Elders Kimball and Hyde and they administered to
him, but while doing so Brother Kimball was knocked senseless to the
floor by some unseen power. He was laid on the bed and prayed for, but
the pain was so great that he could not lie down. He fell upon his
knees and besought God to heal him.

The eyes of the Elders were opened then, and they saw about them a
legion of devils, having the form of men but showing fiendish hatred
in their faces. For an hour and a half these gnashed their teeth and
foamed at the mouth and tried to come near the brethren, but seemed
held back by some power. The Elders did not see the Lord, but the
Prophet told them later that He was there protecting them from harm.
With all their efforts, the evil spirits did not prevent the nine
baptisms that Sabbath morning. Neither did they hinder the work of
the English mission, for it prospered exceedingly, and when a general
conference was held the following Christmas day in the "Cock Pit" at
Preston, the Church in England numbered about one thousand souls.



CHAPTER XXVI.

1837-38.

JOSEPH VISITS CANADA--CARRIES SIDNEY THROUGH SWAMPS TO ESCAPE MOB--MEN
FALL FROM HIGH PLACES--PROPHET ESCAPES TO MISSOURI--DAVID WHITMER AND
OLIVER COWDERY CUT OFF THE CHURCH.

While these important things were going on in England, Joseph, with
Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh, left Kirtland for a visit to the
Saints in Canada. When they reached Painesville, a few miles distant,
their enemies held them all day by bringing lawsuits against Joseph on
trumped-up charges. The sheriff said to Anson Call, who was present,
"We don't want your Prophet to leave Kirtland, and he shan't leave;"
but Brother Call went on Joseph's bond for seventeen hundred dollars,
and he was able to go the next day. Part of the journey was made by
steamer on Lake Erie and the brethren slept on deck with valises and
boots for pillows, but they had health and clear consciences and slept
in peace.

They spent a happy month traveling among the Canadian branches of the
Church and associating with John Taylor and the other Saints. On their
way back, in the latter part of August, Joseph and Sidney came by wagon
from Buffalo to Painesville. While eating supper at the house of Mr.
Bissell, who had been Joseph's lawyer, they discovered that a mob had
gathered, and soon learned that the object was their murder. Their host
was a true friend, however, and slipped them away by a back path. As
soon as the mob found they were gone, bonfires were lit and sentinels
placed along the Mentor road. But Joseph and Sidney took to the swamps
and the bonfires only helped them find their way.

Sidney, being sick, was soon worn out, so Joseph lifted him on his back
and waded for hours through mud and water carrying him. What a body and
soul that Prophet had! He would not desert a friend, though he risked
his life to save him, and with strength like Samson's he carried him
mile after mile through darkness and swamps. They reached Kirtland in
safety late at night, and the next day being Sunday, Joseph preached a
powerful sermon to the Saints.

It was a very sad home-coming for the Prophet. The spirit of apostasy
was very strong, and some of the leading men were found in sin. On the
3rd of September fellowship was withdrawn from three of the Apostles,
Lyman and Luke Johnson and John F. Boynton, and Frederick G. Williams
was not sustained as counselor to Joseph. At the same conference Oliver
Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, John and Joseph Smith, Sen., were made assistant
counselors to the Prophet. A week later the three Apostles confessed
and were received back, but their repentance was very shallow as it
later proved.

Joseph spent most of October on a journey to Missouri. Sidney was with
him and their special mission, besides visiting the Saints, was to pick
out places for the eastern brethren to settle upon with their families
and make homes. The time had about come when Kirtland should be left
and the Saints be gathered in one place. A conference was held on the
7th of November, soon after they came to Far West, and the Missouri
Saints rejected Frederick G. Williams, and Hyrum Smith was made second
counselor to Joseph.

The Prophet reached Kirtland in December and the condition there was
terrible. Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke Johnson, Joseph Coe
and others had laid a plot to destroy the Church. These men who had
received the most glorious visions of heaven now denied the faith and
said Joseph was a false and fallen Prophet. Such men as Brigham Young
were true to him and declared that they knew through the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost that Joseph was a Prophet of God. This brought
persecution upon them, and Brigham was compelled to flee for his life,
soon after Joseph came.

Late on the night of the 12th of January, 1838, Joseph and Sidney
saddled their horses and rode away from Kirtland. All through that
winter night they rode and did not stop until sixty miles lay between
them and their enemies. The life of a Prophet is not the easiest in
the world, is it? They waited there for their families and again began
their flight. For two hundred miles human bloodhounds from Kirtland
tracked them, but the Lord blinded their eyes and the Prophet and his
party went on unharmed. He reached Far West two months later. Some of
the brethren had gone one hundred and twenty miles to meet him and
bring him in comfort to Zion.

In the west as well as in the east, leading men of the Church had
sinned and fallen. Soon after Joseph's coming Oliver Cowdery, David
Whitmer, Lyman Johnson and William E. McLellin were cut off the Church.
These, with Luke Johnson and John F. Boynton, made two of the three
witnesses and four of the Twelve Apostles that had proved unfaithful.
Some time later, on the 8th of July of this year, John Taylor, John E.
Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards were called by revelation
to be Apostles in the places of the fallen ones.

During the spring and summer the Prophet was busy forming stakes
and providing for the Saints that were coming from Kirtland where
confusion and violence reigned even in the Temple. On the sixth of
July five hundred and fifteen of the faithful set out for Missouri
under the leadership of the Seventy quorums. The third number of the
_Elders' Journal_ was published by Joseph at Far West in July. This
was a paper that had been begun when the _Messenger and Advocate_ was
stopped. During this same month the great law of tithing was given to
the Saints. It is recorded in the one hundred and nineteenth section
of the Doctrine and Covenants, and being very short, all of you should
read it. This law was given because the Saints would not obey the law
of consecration, which was a higher law. The Lord still requires us to
obey the law of tithing, but after a time if we are worthy we may be
called to consecrate all we have to Him and hold our possessions as
stewardships.



CHAPTER XXVII.

1838.

THE LAST MISSOURI PERSECUTION BEGINS--FIFTEEN BRAVE MEN DEFEAT ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY COWARDS--PENNISTON AND BLACK SWEAR FALSEHOODS--JOSEPH
AND LYMAN WIGHT PUT UNDER BONDS--MOB GATHERS.

And now our story plunges into the awful events that began in August,
1838, and did not end until the spring of 1839--the time during which
the Latter-day Saints were driven from Missouri. How much dreadful
history was made in those dark months! How many men showed the
rottenness of their hearts; and how many men and women showed the
unutterable suffering they would endure for the sake of truth! It was
a time when some did things that will send their souls to the most
frightful places in hell, and when others earned a place among the
companions of God.

At this time the Latter-day Saints numbered about fifteen thousand
souls, and were settled mainly in Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll
counties. The sixth of August, 1838, was election day, and about twelve
of the brethren went to the polls at Gallatin, Daviess county, to cast
their votes. William Penniston, an old enemy of the Saints, who was
running for one of the offices, made a violent speech in order to drive
them from the polls. Some of his drunken friends attacked the brethren,
but the brave twelve fought like lions with only their bare fists.
Some of them were badly wounded but they pounded the heads of the
Missourians so hard that the whole one hundred and fifty backed off and
ran home for their guns. When they saw the mob gathering, the brethren
hurried away. They hid their families in the hazel bushes and stood
guarding them all night long in the rain.

A terrible story came to Far West the next morning that the mob had
killed some of the brethren and would not give up their bodies. Joseph
gathered about twenty trusty men and started at once for Daviess
county. When they learned no lives were lost they were filled with joy.
Matters, however, were bad enough and they continued on their way,
determined to do all they could for the Saints.

They met a number of leading men of the county at Adam-ondi-Ahman, and
made with them a covenant of peace. Before returning home they also
called on Adam Black, a justice of the peace. They knew he was aiding
the mob and wished to persuade him to deal justly with the Saints. He
was one of those who had sold land to our people, and, like the others,
wished to get it back without paying for it. They talked earnestly with
him and then asked what he would do in the future. This is the answer
he, of his own free will, wrote out for them:

    I Adam Black a justice of the peace of Daviess county do hereby
    Sertify to the people coled Mormin, that he is bound to suport the
    constitution of this State, and of the United State, and he is
    not attached to any mob, nor will not attach himself to any such
    people, and so long as they will not molest me, I will not molest
    them. This the 8th day of August, 1838. Adam Black, J. P.

These movements toward peace did not please the mob at all. They
thought to themselves, "How can we get our land back and drive away
these cursed Mormons if we agree to be at peace with them?" So
Penniston swore before Judge Austin A. King that Joseph Smith and
Lyman Wight had come into Daviess county with a great force of men to
drive away all the old settlers. The sheriff was immediately sent to
arrest them and was much surprised to find Joseph at home in Far West
awaiting him. He was so struck with the gentleness of the Prophet that
he refused to make the arrest, saying that he could act as officer only
in his own county.

Although Adam Black had been ashamed of his meanness when the Prophet
Joseph looked upon him with those clear, steady eyes that at other
times had seen angels and even God Himself, yet when alone he was angry
at himself and sought revenge. He swore that Joseph with one hundred
and fifty men had come to his house and said they would kill him that
instant unless he signed a paper for them.

Lilburn W. Boggs was now governor of the state, and when he heard what
Adam Black said he ordered out the state soldiers to restore peace.
Joseph knew this would mean destruction to the innocent Saints, so
on the thirtieth of August he offered himself to be tried in Daviess
county in order to spare them. Lyman Wight followed his example.

That very day he and Sidney Rigdon began to study law under Generals
Atchison and Doniphan, who, you remember, had been engaged as lawyers
by the Saints in the first Missouri troubles. These men, besides being
prominent lawyers, were generals in the state militia. You will hear
much of them later. The Prophet no doubt thought that law would be a
good thing to understand, since he was being arrested so often, and
he showed his industry and calmness in beginning it now when so many
dangers were about him.

The trial was held on September 7th. Adam Black swore to all manner of
lies, and this of course made him guilty of perjury. Honest men bore
witness that Joseph and Lyman were innocent, and Judge King admitted
it outside of court, and yet to satisfy the mob, he put them under
$500 bonds to keep the peace. These they furnished and went home. Two
days later, Captain William Allred found three men taking guns, powder
and shot from Ray county to the mob in Daviess. He arrested them and
you may be sure the mob were much disappointed when their arms and
ammunition did not come.

The mob had come together at a place near Millport and were making
all kinds of threats against the Saints. Our people had made up their
minds to defend themselves, and Lyman Wight was made commander of the
forces. The mob tried all kinds of tricks to get the Saints to open
the attack in order to get help from Governor Boggs. They took some of
the brethren prisoners and gave it out that they were torturing them.
This trick did not work, so William Dryden, a justice of the peace,
complained that George A. Smith and Alanson Ripley would not allow
themselves to be arrested and brought before his court. This was not
true but it served as an excuse for Boggs to flood the state soldiers
into Daviess county.

General Doniphan came first. He marched to the camp of the mob and
ordered them to disperse. They promised to do so, but did not keep
their word. He then went to the camp of the Saints and they offered
to give up all who might be thought guilty of crime and go home
peacefully, if the mob would break up. This is all that they could
have been asked to do, and General Doniphan seemed satisfied. General
Atchison came into Daviess county at this time, and, after learning
the conditions, he wrote to Governor Boggs that peace would soon be
secured. But the governor, who had listened eagerly to all the lies
that were being told, ordered up four more generals and heavy troops.
General Parks, one of the four, though an enemy of the Saints, wrote to
Boggs saying that the Saints were trying only to protect themselves.
Lyman Wight and fifteen or twenty others were called to appear at court
three weeks later, and peace seemed to have been established.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

1838.

MOB ATTACKS DE WITT--JOSEPH TRIES IN VAIN TO SAVE THE TOWN--MOB DRIVEN
AWAY FROM ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN--APOSTLE PATTEN KILLED IN BATTLE OF CROOKED
RIVER--EXTERMINATION BEGINS AT HAUN'S MILL--ALMA SMITH'S WOUND AND HIS
MOTHER'S FAITH.

Although the mob had not been able to fall upon the Saints in Daviess
county at this time, they loved blood and plunder too well to remain
at peace. On the second of October the very same men who had begun and
kept up the trouble at Daviess, were found gathered around the little
town of De Witt, Carroll county, under the leadership of Dr. Austin,
Major Ashley, a member of the legislature, and Rev. Sashiel Woods,
a Presbyterian clergyman. They were armed with muskets and cannon,
and opened fire upon the town. The next day General Parks, with two
companies of militia, joined them. Bogart, one of the captains, was a
rank enemy of the Saints, and the soldiers themselves were in close
sympathy with the mob.

After bearing the fire of the enemy for two days, the Saints, who were
under the command of Col. George M. Hinkle, returned it. Though the mob
numbered more than our people in De Witt, they dared not continue the
fight until more of their kind should join them. When General Lucas
heard that several persons had fallen in this battle, he wrote to the
governor that if one of the citizens of Carroll had been killed, before
five days five thousand volunteers would be raised against the Mormons,
"and those base and degraded beings will be exterminated from the face
of the earth."

News came to the Prophet that his brethren in Carroll county were in
danger, and he hurried away with all possible speed toward De Witt. It
seemed as though he was rushing on to death, for his journey lay among
his bitterest enemies, and the roads to De Witt were guarded by those
who would have loved to take his life. But his own danger was nothing
to him, he knew that he could give new hope and courage to the Saints,
although he did not bear arms. He asked the judges of the circuit
court and other officers for protection to the Saints, but this was
useless. Through his efforts also, a number of honorable men made sworn
statements to the governor that the Latter-day Saints were innocent and
yet were being treated like enemies. Boggs, however, would not let the
state's forces interfere.

The mob was still afraid to make an open attack, feeling it safer to
starve the Saints out. They burned our people's houses and killed and
roasted their cattle, while the owners were dying of hunger in the
town. It was useless to hold out any longer, and the Saints agreed
to leave, provided they were paid for their homes and property. They
did leave, but received nothing. It was a terrible flight from De
Witt to Far West, for the mob would not let them go in peace as they
agreed. One poor mother, with a baby only a day old, tried to follow
her friends, but the hardships were too great. Before they reached Far
West she died and was buried, as were many others during that flight,
without a coffin, at the roadside.

After they had gone the Rev. Mr. Woods invited his friends to go with
him to Daviess county and drive the Saints from Adam-ondi-Ahman. He
said that the land sales were near at hand, and if their luck was as
good as at De Witt they could buy back for almost nothing the land they
had sold the Mormons only a short time before. When Joseph heard they
were coming he again sought the post of danger and was with the Saints
when the attack was made.

The mob, numbering nearly a thousand, plundered the farms that were
some distance from the town. Men, women and children were out in the
terrible storms of the 17th and 18th of October, without any homes to
shelter them. Agnes Smith was one of these. Her husband, Don Carlos
Smith, Joseph's brother, was on a mission. After her house had been
burned, she fled from the mob with her two babies in her arms, and
waded Grand river before she stopped to rest. But now General Parks
sent Lyman Wight, who was one of his colonels, to lead a company of
brethren against the cowards. The mob fled but burned their huts as
they went, and then spread the lie that the Mormons had done it. From
this time on the people living in the scattered settlements made their
way as soon as possible to Far West.

On the 24th of October, 1838, Captain Bogart, who was a Methodist
preacher when the more important work of killing and plundering the
Saints did not call him away, led his mob-soldiers into camp on Crooked
river. They had taken three brethren prisoners from their peaceful
homes, and spread the report that they would murder them that night.
When this news came to Far West, Col. Hinkle sent David W. Patten with
fifty men to the rescue. They reached Bogart's camp at daybreak, and as
they marched down the hill, their forms, outlined against the sky, made
a fine target for their enemies, hidden under the trees below.

Bogart's men suddenly opened fire. Three or four of the brethren fell.
Captain Patten gave the order to shoot and then charge down upon the
enemy. For a few minutes they fought hand to hand with swords, and then
the mob, though larger in numbers, wheeled about and fled. As they ran,
one turned and shot Captain Patten, giving him a mortal wound. That
night he died, surrounded by the Prophet and his true friends. His last
words to his wife were: "Whatever else you do, do not deny the faith!"
Thus passed away Apostle David W. Patten, who had rescued friends and
given up his life in doing so, and greater love than this no man hath.

This battle gave an excuse for the wild and terrible stories that set
all Missouri in an uproar. Many good citizens were really afraid that
the Mormons were about to march upon and destroy them. But surely
Governor Boggs could not have been deceived, and yet he ordered out two
thousand men with the command to kill off all the Mormons or drive them
from the state.

This extermination, as it was called, began at Haun's Mill, in Caldwell
county, on the 30th of October. The little settlement of Saints was at
peace when suddenly two hundred and forty men rode up on horseback and
began shooting without a moment's warning. They showed no pity, but
killed men, wounded women, blew out the brains of children that were
pleading for their lives, and even robbed the dead. Seventeen were
killed that afternoon, but there was no time to dig their graves. Amid
the groans and tears of widows and fatherless children, their bodies
were thrown into an old well and there they lay, a foul blot upon the
land of liberty.

Little Alma Smith, who was only eight years old, after seeing his
father and brother shot, fell to the ground with his hip joint and all
the flesh about it torn away He knew that if he cried out or asked for
mercy, as his brother had done, the bad men would kill him. So he lay
pretending to be dead until after dark, when he heard his mother call
him. She placed him beside his dead father and brother and prayed that
she might know what to do for her little boy. Our Father in heaven
heard and answered her prayer. A voice told her to wash the wound clean
with water in which the wood ashes from the fire had been soaked. She
obeyed, although the cloth brought out each time mashed bone and flesh.
After it was clean the voice told her to gather the roots of a slippery
elm tree, make a poultice with them and fill the great hole in her
boy's hip. Willard Smith, another son, who had escaped, gathered the
roots and his mother made the poultice. Their prayers and faith were
rewarded. Alma was healed and grew once more well and strong.



CHAPTER XXIX.

1838.

HINKLE BETRAYS JOSEPH AND BRETHREN TO MOB-MILITIA--COURT-MARTIAL
ORDERS THEM TO BE SHOT--SOLDIERS SACK FAR WEST--JOSEPH PREACHES IN
INDEPENDENCE--BRETHREN TAKEN TO RICHMOND FOR TRIAL--CLARK FINISHES
TERRIBLE WORK AT FAR WEST AND ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN--MOCK TRIAL AND
IMPRISONMENT.

During this time of trouble in Missouri Satan gained control over the
hearts of some of the leading men in the Church. Thomas B. Marsh,
President of the Twelve Apostles, became an apostate and joined William
E. McLellin and other men who had denied the faith, in spreading evil
reports concerning Joseph and the Church. How awful it was for these
men who had seen the most glorious sights that men on earth have ever
been permitted to see, now trying to stir up the spirit of murder
against the Prophet and to destroy the Church of Christ!

Satan found other men also that were useful aids to him in the great
war he was waging. The highest men in the state became his tools.
Governor Boggs, when the Saints appealed to him for help as the mob was
gathering about De Witt, said that the quarrel was between the Mormons
and the mob and they must fight it out. But as soon as our people
showed that they would fight for their lives, he brought out the whole
power of the state to crush them, and Haun's Mill massacre was the
first result.

On the day of that terrible slaughter the army came before Far West
and camped at a safe distance. In the morning a white flag was carried
toward the town, and Col. Hinkle went out to meet it. When he returned
he told Joseph that the commanders wished him and other leading men to
come to their camp that night and see if they could not come to some
terms of peace. The brethren agreed, but when they reached the camp
they found the whole army awaiting them, and Hinkle, the traitor, said:
"These are the prisoners I agreed to deliver up." The mob yelled with
delight and General Lucas brandished his sword, as though he had done a
very honorable thing.

Next morning, after having spent a cheerless night, the brethren were
tried by court-martial. There were seventeen preachers of the different
churches among the officers of this court. Joseph and some of the
others were not soldiers and could not be tried legally by a soldier's
court. Yet without being able to say a word for themselves they were
condemned to be shot at eight o'clock the following morning on the
public square of Far West. General Doniphan said boldly that it was
murder, and that he washed his hands of the whole affair.

It was not enough for General Lucas to take the leaders by deceit, but
this same day he commanded the people to give up their arms. They had
to obey. Then followed such a scene as that at Independence just five
years before, when the Saints surrendered their arms to Colonel Pitcher
at his command. The mob militia was turned loose upon the helpless
ones. They robbed the houses, and hunted down and shot the men. One
woman also was killed and many others suffered a fate worse than death.

The Prophet and his companions were not shot. The vain Lucas wished to
take them through the counties and show them as great prizes of war.
They were permitted only to see their families, and when Joseph asked
the guards to allow him to speak a few moments alone with his wife,
they refused. The heartless wretches dragged their prisoners away and
their wives and children cried as if their hearts would break, for they
never expected to see them again.

Lucas took them direct to Jackson county, where they arrived on the
fourth of November. A great crowd met them at Independence, and one
woman asked the guard which was the Lord whom the Mormons worshiped.
The Prophet was pointed out to her and she asked him whether he really
called himself the Lord and Savior. He answered that he was only a
man sent by Jesus Christ to preach the Gospel. She was surprised and
asked more questions, and the Prophet that Sunday morning stood up and
preached a powerful sermon on the first principles of the Gospel. This
fulfilled a prophecy, for he had said publicly several months before
that one of the Elders would preach in Jackson county before the close
of 1838. During the four days that the brethren were at Independence,
people flocked to their prison to hear them preach and became very
friendly.

General Clark had been put in command of all the troops by Governor
Boggs, because Clark was so heartless. He was jealous of Lucas because,
having reached Far West first, Lucas had captured the Prophet, so he
sent a command that the prisoners be brought to Richmond, Ray county,
at once. But now arose a strange difficulty. The soldiers had become so
friendly to the brethren that they would not take them back to Clark.
At last three men were induced to go and they started out with their
seven captives. On the way, however, they became so drunk that they
could not care for themselves, and the prisoners took away their guns
and horses and kept them until they sobered up. Escape would have been
easy, but the brethren hoped for a trial, and all they wished was a
chance to prove themselves innocent. When they reached Richmond they
were chained together and day and night were disgusted with the curses
and filthy stories of the guards.

Parley P. Pratt says that one night while these vile creatures were
telling how they had defiled wives and virgins and dashed out the
brains of men, women and children, Joseph arose and in a voice of
thunder spoke:

    "Silence! Ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus
    Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live
    another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I
    die this instant!"

    He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained,
    and without a weapon, calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he
    looked down upon the quailing guards, whose knees smote together,
    and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged
    his pardon, and remained quiet until exchange of guards.

    I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in ministerial robes, and
    criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended upon a
    breath, in the courts of England; I have witnessed a congress in
    solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive
    of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors
    assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms. But dignity and majesty
    have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a
    dungeon, in an obscure village of Missouri.

After Joseph and his companions had been taken by General Lucas to
Independence, General Clark with about two thousand men came to Far
West. This made six thousand soldiers that had preyed upon the little
town during one week. He had all the brethren marched out and placed in
line before him. They were perfectly harmless since their arms had been
taken away. After putting fifty-six of them under arrest he commanded
the remaining ones to prepare to flee from Missouri. He told them
they need not hope ever to see their leaders again for their fate was
fixed. After his speech he compelled the brethren, at the point of the
bayonet, to sign deeds giving up their property to pay the expenses of
the mob.

General Wilson had been sent to Adam-ondi-Ahman. He put a guard around
the town, arrested all the men and then tried them in a court of which
Adam Black was judge. The men of the town were so manifestly innocent
of wrong doing that even Adam Black would not convict them. Wilson
ordered that within ten days they should all be gone from Daviess
county.

Clark, with his fifty-six prisoners, came to Richmond to meet Joseph
and the rest of the prisoners. He seems to have settled on their fate,
for Elder Jedediah M. Grant heard him say to his soldiers: "Gentlemen,
you shall have the honor of shooting the Mormon leaders next Monday
morning at eight o'clock." But Clark was a great lawyer and knew that
such action would be absolutely lawless. He therefore hunted for days
to find some charge that he could make against his prisoners. In a
letter to the governor, he said they were guilty of treason, murder,
arson, burglary, robbery, larceny and perjury, but he decided to count
mainly on treason and murder.

A mock trial was held for sixteen days, and at the end of this time all
but eleven, including Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt,
were either let out on bail or discharged. Austin A. King was judge and
let the worst falsehoods be given in testimony. The brethren were asked
to call their witnesses. They named over fifty, and Bogart was sent
out with a force of soldiers to bring them in. Instead of being put on
the witness stand, however, they were thrown into prison. Whenever any
witness showed that he would tell the truth about the prisoners the mob
rushed upon him with their bayonets.

The condition of the Saints was now very, very dark. Joseph and his
two counselors, Sidney and Hyrum, were put in Liberty jail, as it
seemed, only to await death. Parley P. Pratt, one of the Apostles, was
in prison at Richmond. David W. Patten had been killed, and Thomas B.
Marsh, William E. McLellin and others of the Apostles, had denied the
faith and become the bitterest enemies to the Church. The governor
of the state had ordered the soldiers to slay the Saints. Winter was
coming on and once more they had to flee and find new homes.



CHAPTER XXX.

1838-39.

PETITION THE LEGISLATURE FOR JUSTICE--JOHN TAYLOR AND JOHN E. PAGE
ORDAINED APOSTLES--PREPARATIONS TO LEAVE MISSOURI--TREATMENT OF JOSEPH
AND HIS FELLOW-PRISONERS--ILLINOIS THE NEXT GATHERING PLACE OF THE
SAINTS.

When Joseph and his two counselors, Sidney and Hyrum, who formed the
First Presidency of the Church, were thrown into prison, the Saints,
though in great trouble, were not without a leader. Brigham Young
was President of the Twelve Apostles, the quorum next in authority
to the First Presidency. He gathered about him the faithful Apostles
and brethren and declared that he knew Joseph was a true Prophet. He
called all those whose faith was still strong to join him in aiding
the Saints. An earnest petition, telling of the wrongs our people
had suffered and asking for justice, was sent to the legislature of
Missouri. On the 19th of December this was discussed, and though many
of the members were honorable men and worked hard for the cause of the
Saints, yet those who had helped in the outrages were too strong. The
petition was laid on the table, and this meant that nothing would be
done in the matter. On that very day John Taylor and John E. Page were
ordained Apostles under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball
at Far West.

When it was found that the law-makers of Missouri would do nothing for
the Saints, they knew they must obey the command of Governor Boggs to
leave. Many of them were very poor. Their horses, cattle and other
animals had been shot or stolen, and their homes taken from them. Some
of the leading men felt that every family should take care of itself,
for those best off were poor enough, but Brigham Young declared that
he would help the poor. He suggested a pledge that all who had means
would use it freely until every worthy Saint who wished to go should
be taken from Missouri. Through his zeal many of the brethren entered
into this covenant and most were faithful to it. When the mob saw that
Brigham had become a leader they began to persecute him as they had
done Joseph. In the middle of February, 1839, he was compelled to flee
from Far West.

The general movement of the Church had been toward the west. You
remember how the Saints gathered from New York to Ohio and from there
went to Missouri. But instead of continuing westward now, Brigham and
others traveled to the east, and, crossing over the Mississippi river,
settled for a time in Quincy, Illinois, among a very friendly people.
Although he himself had escaped, he did not forget the Saints that had
been left behind and used all his efforts for their aid. He worked so
diligently for subscriptions that many of the brethren offered to sell
their hats and clothing to raise money.

It was winter time, and the Missouri winters are very severe. The case
of Amanda Smith is an instance of what the people suffered and did.
Her husband and one son had been killed at Haun's Mill and another boy
wounded as you no doubt remember. She had to milk, cut wood and do
the work of a man. The mob swore they would kill the poor women and
children who were left of this little settlement if they did not leave
the state. So she with her five children set out with an ox team. After
unspeakable suffering she reached Quincy and then sent her wagon back
for more of the Saints.

It was the last day of November, 1838, when Joseph and his companions
were thrust into Liberty jail. The treatment they received was very
harsh. At first they were not allowed to send or receive letters or
see their friends. A number of times they were given poison, and once
for five days a strange kind of meat was placed before them which the
guards called "Mormon beef." Joseph warned the brethren not to eat of
it since he believed it to be human flesh. After he was allowed to
write he sent long letters of comfort, advice and instruction to the
Saints. In one of these he said, "We glory in our persecution, because
we know that God is with us. He is our friend, and will save our souls.
We do not care for them that can kill our body; they cannot harm our
souls. We ask no favors at the hands of the mobs, nor of the world, nor
of the devil, nor of his emissaries the dissenters, and those who love,
and make and swear falsehoods, to take away our lives."

In the early part of February, 1839, Sidney Rigdon was released by the
court, but he dared not leave the prison because the mob many times had
threatened to kill the brethren, should any court set them free. The
jailor, however, was friendly, and let Sidney out secretly one night,
and he escaped. Before going he showed a very bitter spirit and went so
far as to say that the sufferings of Jesus Christ were a fool to his.
This was the spirit that began to destroy his usefulness and finally
led to his fall.

At about this time Heber C. Kimball and Alanson Ripley were pleading
with the judges at Liberty to give justice to their brethren. They were
so earnest that at length one of the judges looked them squarely in the
face and said to the others, "By the look of these men's eyes they are
whipped but not conquered; and let us beware how we treat these men,
for their looks bespeak innocence." The other judges had harder hearts
and would not consent to set the prisoners free.

As one of the brethren was moving his family eastward, he lost the road
and instead of going into Illinois passed northward into Iowa. Here he
met a certain Doctor Galland, who, learning the troubled story of the
Saints, became much interested and began to plan to have them come and
settle in the territory of Iowa. He owned a large tract of land and
he offered to sell it to the Saints. Joseph learned of this while in
prison and though he could not investigate it he took a lively interest
in the plan, for it offered a new place of gathering for the Church.
Much land in Iowa was bought and this called attention to the little
town of Commerce, across the Mississippi river, where the Saints built
the city of Nauvoo.



CHAPTER XXXI.

1839.

PRISONERS IN LIBERTY JAIL SEEK THEIR LIBERTY--TAKEN TO GALLATIN FOR
TRIAL--ORDERED TO BE TAKEN TO BOONE COUNTY--THEIR ESCAPE FROM THE
GUARDS--CONFERENCE AT FAR WEST--A PROPHECY FULFILLED--LAST OF THE
SAINTS LEAVE MISSOURI.

To keep the Prophet and his companions in prison and to refuse their
many appeals to be tried by a fair court was so plainly unjust that
some of them wished to escape if the Lord was willing. Joseph enquired,
and the answer came that if all were agreed to leave that night the
way should be opened for them. Lyman Wight, however, was fearful, and
persuaded them to wait until the following night before trying to
escape. They did so, but the Lord punished them for waiting. That night
the jailor came in alone, leaving the doors open behind him, and they
could easily have run out. The next night he came with a double guard,
and also with some visitors, and when the brethren tried to escape they
were stopped, and their visitors were locked up with them. When the
Lord directs He wishes us to act at once. As soon as the people of the
neighborhood learned that the prisoners had tried to break jail, they
came rushing together and were very angry; but Joseph promised that no
harm should be done, and their visiting brethren should not lose even a
saddle blanket. This proved to be true.

On the 6th of April, 1839, the captives were taken from Liberty to
Gallatin, Daviess county, for another trial before Judge King. They
did not hope for justice from him. He was a brother-in-law to Hugh
Brazeale, one of the men killed in the battle between the Saints and
the mob in Jackson county, on the 4th of November, and he had a keen
hatred for the Mormons. At this time, too, fifty men of Daviess county
had sworn that they would neither eat nor drink until they had slain
Joseph Smith. Some of the brethren feared to go, but Joseph promised
that if they would but trust in the Lord He would preserve them, and
they would receive better treatment than they had heretofore.

On reaching the courthouse the mob rushed upon them, but Joseph stepped
out boldly and said, "We are in your hands. If we are guilty, we do not
refuse to be punished by the law." Hearing this, the leaders held back
their men. Joseph's promise came true. They were shown more kindness
and were not injured, but the trial did them no good. Judge King and
the whole jury were drunk. Brother Stephen Markham, who had borne true
witness, had to leave Gallatin in the night to save his life.

Judge King ordered that the prisoners be taken to Boone county, and
on the way the guards became helplessly drunk. This time the brethren
felt that the Lord had opened the way for them to escape. There was no
justice in the courts for them. THey had been put in prison and held
there contrary to law, and they had a perfect right to escape and save
their lives. This was on the 16th of April, and slowly and painfully
they made their way toward the Mississippi. They traveled mainly at
nights, crossed swollen streams, suffered for food and shelter, but
through the mercy of God at length reached Quincy in safety, where they
found most of the Saints.

A little before this last trouble for the Saints in Missouri began, on
the 8th of July, 1838, Joseph enquired to find out the will of the Lord
concerning the Twelve. He said that they should meet on the building
spot of His house at Far West, on the 26th of the following April, and
there take leave of His Saints. The apostates and enemies, knowing of
this prophecy, swore that it never could be fulfilled. Far West was in
their hands. There were few Saints there, and the enemies threatened to
kill any of the Twelve if they made their appearance.

Brigham Young called the Apostles together and told them that they must
fulfill the word of the Lord. They set out bravely for Far West, and
on April 26th, 1839, before their enemies were awake, they met at the
building spot of the Temple and held conference. They ordained Wilford
Woodruff and George A. Smith to the Apostleship, cut thirty-one persons
off the Church, and dismissed their meeting. After saying good-by to
the Saints, they set out for Quincy. They had fulfilled a prophecy
which the apostates sneeringly said would prove Joseph a false prophet.

The remaining Saints now moved at once to Illinois, and the great crime
against liberty was complete. They had come to the new state full of
hope and faith; they left it bowed down in sorrow, but with faith
unchanged. They parted from their homes and possessions, worth in all
many millions of dollars. They left the rough graves of their dear
ones, whose bodies were buried in many cases without coffins and whose
souls were crying from under the altar for the vengeance of God.



CHAPTER XXXII.

1839-40.

SAINTS LOCATE AT COMMERCE, AFTERWARDS CALLED NAUVOO--AN UNHEALTHY
PLACE--A DAY OF MIRACULOUS HEALINGS--APOSTLES SET OUT UPON MISSIONS TO
ENGLAND--THEIR LABORS IN THAT LAND.

When the chosen people of the Lord had fled from the wicked mobs of
Missouri and settled among the kind-hearted citizens of Illinois,
they began to enjoy a season of welfare and happiness, that showed to
the world, after all the evil spoken of Mormonism, how powerful this
religion really is. This was one of those times of peace that changed
with the times of trouble. And you have doubtless noticed since the
organization of the Church that after a season of persecution comes a
season of liberty.

This was the last time in the life of the Prophet Joseph when he could
use his great mind and soul undisturbed, to advance the people he was
chosen to lead; and though some troubles came to him, yet these were
small compared with what he had already passed through. We love to look
at the Prophet during this time, in the prime of his manhood, employed
at the work that was so near his heart. The Church had grown to number
many thousands, and its members were both in the new and in the old
world. As the work grew the burden on the Prophet became heavier, but
he was equal to it all.

On May-day, in the spring of 1839, Joseph bought the first piece of
land at Commerce, a little village of six houses on the banks of the
Mississippi, about fifty miles north of Quincy. The ground was low
and marshy, and the place very unhealthful, but it was a beautiful
situation. The great Mississippi river flowed in a splendid curve on
three sides of it. The name was soon changed from Commerce to Nauvoo,
the latter being a Hebrew word, meaning beautiful. Ten days later
Joseph settled his family here, and the Saints began rapidly to gather
and build up a city. They lived at first in tents and log-huts and were
very glad of these.

Land was bought also just across the river in Iowa, and Brigham Young
and others settled there. The Saints were all worn out with the great
hardships of the past winter, and this made them an easy prey to the
disease that lurked in the swamps along the river. It was not long
until most of them were taken down with chills and fever. Joseph
himself was stricken, his iron constitution giving way on account of
nursing the sick about him so constantly.

On the 22nd of July the Prophet rose from his bed, and filled with the
Spirit of the Lord he went forth, and these are some of the labors of
that day as given by Wilford Woodruff, who was present at the time:

    Many lay sick along the bank of the river, and Joseph walked along
    up to the lower stone house, occupied by Sidney Rigdon, and he
    healed all the sick that lay in his path. Among the number was
    Henry G. Sherwood, who was nigh unto death. Joseph stood in the
    mouth of his tent and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ
    to arise and come out of his tent, and he obeyed him and was
    healed. Brother Benjamin Brown and his family also lay sick, the
    former appearing to be in a dying condition. Joseph healed them
    in the name of the Lord. After healing all that lay sick upon the
    bank of the river as far as the stone house, he called upon Elder
    Kimball and some others to accompany him across the river to visit
    the sick at Montrose. Many of the Saints were living at the old
    military barracks. Among the number were several of the Twelve. On
    his arrival, the first house he visited was that occupied by Elder
    Brigham Young, the President of the quorum of the Twelve, who lay
    sick. Joseph healed him, when he arose and accompanied the Prophet
    on his visit to others who were in the same condition. They visited
    Elder W. Woodruff, also Elders Orson Pratt and John Taylor, all
    of whom were living in Montrose. They also accompanied him. The
    next place they visited was the home of Elijah Fordham, who was
    supposed to be about breathing his last. When the company entered
    the room the Prophet of God walked up to the dying man, and took
    hold of his right hand and spoke to him; but Brother Fordham was
    unable to speak; his eyes were set in his head like glass, and he
    seemed entirely unconscious of all around him. Joseph held his
    hand and looked into his eyes in silence for a length of time. A
    change in the countenance of Brother Fordham was soon perceptible
    to all present. His sight returned, and upon Joseph asking him if
    he knew him, he, in a low whisper, answered "Yes." Joseph asked
    him if he had faith to be healed. He answered, "I fear it is too
    late; if you had come sooner I think I could have been healed." The
    Prophet said, "Do you not believe in Jesus Christ?" He answered in
    a feeble voice, "I do." Joseph then stood erect, still holding his
    hand in silence several moments, then he spoke in a loud voice,
    saying, "Brother Fordham, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ
    to arise from this bed and be made whole." His voice was like the
    voice of God and not of man. It seemed as though the house shook
    to its very foundation. Brother Fordham arose from his bed and was
    immediately made whole. His feet were bound in poultices, which
    he kicked off; then putting on his clothes he ate a bowl of bread
    and milk and followed the Prophet into the street. The company
    next visited Brother Joseph Bates Noble, who lay very sick. He
    also was healed by the Prophet. By this time the wicked became
    alarmed, and followed the company into Brother Noble's house. After
    Brother Noble was healed all kneeled down to pray. Brother Fordham
    was mouth, and while praying he fell to the floor. The Prophet
    arose, and looking round he saw quite a number of unbelievers in
    the house, whom he ordered out. When the room was cleared of them
    Brother Fordham came to and finished his prayer.

Soon after this great day of healing, the Apostles began setting out
on their mission to England. Heber C. Kimball had already opened
the English mission in the summer of 1837, but he returned home the
following year and Willard Richards was left in charge. We can hardly
think of greater sacrifices that men can make than the Apostles made
in going out at this time. Many were very sick and their families
suffering from sickness and want. The Apostles traveled without purse
and scrip, relying on the Lord to care for them and supply their wants.
Their sufferings and integrity will be lessons of faith for all time to
come.

On the first of July Joseph and his counselors crossed the Mississippi
river to the Iowa shore and there held meeting with the Apostles.
Joseph blessed them for their journey, and gave much instruction
concerning their coming duties, and unfolded many of the glorious
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

One week later John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff set out for their
mission. Brother Woodruff rose from a sick bed, where his wife also lay
unable to rise. He blessed her and went forth without a murmur. Elder
Taylor was about the only one of the Apostles who enjoyed health, but
on the way he too was stricken down. Although he was without money he
would not give up, and the Lord rewarded his faith. He reached New York
with only one cent in his pocket. The brethren there offered to donate
enough to pay his passage to England but he refused it, saying that the
Lord would open the way. Before the day of sailing, enough money was
given him to pay for his own ticket and that of Brother Turley, whom he
had promised to take with him.

Parley P. Pratt had escaped after great trouble from prison through the
aid of his brother Orson, and now together, on the 29th of August, they
left Nauvoo. On the 18th of September Brigham Young departed, though
unable to walk alone, and leaving a sick wife, and a baby only ten days
old. He was joined by Heber C. Kimball, whose wife and all but one
child were sick. Both Brigham and Heber were so weak that they could
not carry their single trunk. George A. Smith went three days later,
leaving father, mother, sister and brother helpless in a log stable. He
was so thin and pale that a man called out as he passed, "Somebody has
been robbing a graveyard of a skeleton."

Joseph said later that the Apostles "went forth weeping and bearing
precious seed," but they "returned with rejoicing and bearing sheaves
with them." It was a glorious work they did. Each one was blessed
with success in his particular field. Willard Richards was ordained
an Apostle on the 14th of April, 1840, and this made eight Apostles
laboring in the British mission. In a little over one year 5,000 copies
of the Book of Mormon had been printed, and 3,000 hymn books and 50,000
tracts had been published. The _Millennial Star_, a monthly paper, had
been begun, with Parley P. Pratt as editor. Over 3,000 more persons
had joined the Church, and the precious seed was sown in many parts
of England, and also in Scotland, Ireland and the Isle of Man. And
when the Apostles came back they did return with rejoicings and their
sheaves were full of precious grain.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

1839-40.

JOSEPH AND COMPANIONS DEPART FOR THE NATIONAL CAPITAL--THE
PROPHET'S ACT OF HEROISM--VISITS PRESIDENT VAN BUREN--THE LATTER'S
COWARDICE--APOSTLE HYDE'S MISSION TO JERUSALEM--BOGGS' DEMAND FOR
THE PROPHET AND HIS BRETHREN--DEATH OF THE PROPHET'S FATHER--NAUVOO
CHARTERED AS A CITY--NAUVOO UNIVERSITY AND LEGION.

When the government of the United States was founded, the idea of the
inspired fathers of the nation was to make it possible for all men to
enjoy liberty and justice. Each state had its government but above the
states was the national government, which was to give justice when
it could not be obtained in the states. This was the idea Joseph the
Prophet had of our government, and he determined that since Missouri
would not right the great wrong done to the Saints, he would carry
their cause to the United States and there seek justice. You know
something of what they suffered. They lost their lands, houses, cattle
and almost all that they had, and worse than this, they were robbed of
their rights as American citizens to worship God as they saw fit and to
live peacefully wherever they chose to live.

In the fall of 1839, in company with Elias Higbee and Sidney Rigdon,
Joseph went east to Washington to lay the matter before the President
and Congress, and to ask that claims against Missouri for about one
and a half million dollars' worth of property be paid. While they
were traveling by stage in the mountains between Philadelphia and
Washington, the driver left his seat to get a drink of grog. The horses
became frightened and began to run. The road led down a hill and the
pace soon became terrific. The passengers were beside themselves with
fear.

Joseph's presence of mind and cool bravery were at once seen. He calmed
his fellow-travelers as well as possible but had to hold one excited
woman from throwing her baby out of the window. He then opened the door
and securing a hold on the side of the coach, although the horses were
running at full speed, drew himself by main strength up to the driver's
seat. Gathering up the reins, he soon had the horses under control.

The passengers felt that they owed him their lives, and seemed very
grateful. They praised his bravery, as it of course deserved, in the
highest terms, and some of them who were members of Congress, said that
they would speak of the act before that body, feeling sure that mention
would be made of their deliverer. They asked his name, but when he told
them he was Joseph Smith, all their gratitude and praise ceased at
once, and nothing more was said.

Sidney had been left sick at Philadelphia, but Joseph and Judge Higbee,
on the twenty-ninth of November, the day following their arrival at
Washington, visited President Van Buren and gave him their letters of
introduction. He read one, and looking up with a frown on his face
said: "What can I do? I can do nothing for you. If I do anything I
shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri." Joseph was
not frightened by such cowardly words and thought the man a fool for
judging before he had heard their cause. He told the President boldly
of how Missouri had over-ridden the Constitution and of the horrible
crimes that resulted. Van Buren was moved to pity and promised to
reconsider what he had said.

Joseph and his companion prepared a long petition to place before
Congress. They met a committee of the representatives and senators from
Illinois and other friendly congressmen and laid their cause plainly
before them. They again visited President Van Buren, but he had now
turned against them and at this time spoke those cowardly, traitorous
words: "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you. If I take up
for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri."

The committee appointed by Congress to consider the petition reported
against it also. For their own political reasons, like the President,
they did not wish to favor the Mormons, and besides this they probably
feared to touch the great question of State's Rights, which was not
settled until the Civil War.

Joseph's mission to Washington seemed to be in vain. Yet it was not
entirely a failure. He preached a number of public sermons and he did
much to spread the truth, and gained many friends. He also had a chance
to become acquainted with those who were in high places in the nation,
and measure his strength and intelligence with theirs.

At the April conference of 1840, Apostle Orson Hyde, who had not gone
with the other members of the Twelve to England, was called on a
mission to Jerusalem. Apostle John E. Page was appointed to go with
him, but this he refused to do. Elder Hyde left Nauvoo nine days later,
traveled to the Holy Land and there offered a prayer of dedication on
the Mount of Olives, that the Jews might gather home. He then went to
Europe, and in Germany published a pamphlet telling of the rise and
doctrines of the Church. His mission lasted over two years.

In midsummer of the year 1840, a circumstance happened which showed
that the old spirit had not died out in Missouri. A party of men
from that state came to Nauvoo and took away by force--actually
kidnapped--four of the brethren. These were James Allred, Alanson
Brown, Noah Rogers and Benjamin Boyce, and before they escaped they
were nearly killed by the cruelties of the Missourians. Two or three
months later, on the fifteenth of September, Governor Boggs asked
Governor Carlin of Illinois to have Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman
Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb Baldwin and Alanson Brown arrested for
having fled from the Missouri prisons.

Although Governor Carlin must have known that the object of Boggs was
murder, yet he issued an order for their arrest, and the sheriff was
sent with it to Nauvoo. Joseph and the others who were there went into
hiding, because they knew that if they were taken back to Missouri it
meant foul play. The sheriff, therefore, returned the order to Governor
Carlin. The danger was past and Joseph again came out among the people.

On the day before the order for the Prophet's arrest was made, Joseph
Smith, Sen., the first Patriarch of the Church, died on account of the
hardships he had endured in fleeing from Missouri. He was faithful
to the last and died a martyr. On the twenty-fourth of January,
1841, Hyrum was appointed Patriarch, and William Law was made second
counselor to Joseph in Hyrum's place.

Nauvoo had now grown, as if by magic, into a town of considerable size.
Hundreds of comfortable houses had taken the place of the half dozen
huts found in the marsh, a year and a half before. The citizens now
asked the legislature that it be made into a city. Joseph and others
wrote out a charter, and in December it was accepted by the legislature
and signed by the governor. This charter, as Joseph said, made it
possible for any honest man to live secure, whatever his religion or
party. It provided for a mayor, aldermen and councilors; also for a
university and body of soldiers called the Nauvoo Legion.

An election was held on the first of February, and John C. Bennett,
an educated man who had shortly before joined the Church, was
elected mayor. Joseph was one of the councilors. At the first city
council meeting the Prophet presented a bill for the organizing of a
university, and he was elected one of the trustees. When the Legion
was formed with six companies, Joseph was made lieutenant general. So
you see that the first President of the Church, as all the others have
been, was a practical man, and was willing to do his part as a citizen.

He accepted the office of councilor, a somewhat humble position,
because he wished to aid in giving the young city good government. At
one of the first meetings he introduced a bill to prevent the sale
of liquor, and this made drunkenness almost unknown. He accepted the
position of trustee of the university because he was a great friend
to education and wished to make the school thrive. He accepted the
position of lieutenant general in the Legion because it was a duty of
the citizens to have a military organization; and he was willing to do
his part to make it a worthy one.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

1841-42.

CARLIN SENDS OUT THE OLD ORDER FOR ARREST--JOSEPH NURSES THE
SHERIFF--THE TRIAL--DON CARLOS SMITH DIES--VISIT FROM SAC AND FOX
INDIANS--BAPTISM FOR DEAD BEGUN--FIRST RELIEF SOCIETY ORGANIZED.

The bright days of prosperity seemed to have come to the Church with
the spring of 1811. At a general conference held on the 6th of April,
the corner stones of the temple at Nauvoo were laid and three days
later Lyman Wight was ordained an Apostle. This made the quorum of the
Twelve complete. All the other eleven were successfully engaged in the
ministry.

When the summer came, Hyrum and William Law went on a mission to
the east, and Joseph went down the Mississippi to Quincy with them.
Governor Carlin lived here and the Prophet visited him, and the two
men had a long friendly talk. The governor had commissioned Joseph
lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion only three months before, and
nothing was said of the order for the arrest of the Prophet that had
been sent out in September of the preceding year.

After Joseph had set out for Nauvoo, Carlin found the old order and
put it into the hands of the sheriff and sent him with a number of
men, one of them a Missourian, to capture the Prophet. They found and
arrested him about twenty-five miles from Nauvoo, but when the man from
Missouri began to threaten and curse, most of those who had come with
the sheriff, being honorable men, withdrew and would have nothing to do
with the arrest. Joseph went back to Quincy and his trial was set by
Stephen A. Douglas for three days later, the 8th of June, at Monmouth,
Warren county.

Sheriff King, who had made the arrest, went back with Joseph to Nauvoo,
but on the way became very sick. The Prophet took him to his own home,
and he himself nursed the officer most carefully. Early on the morning
of the day before the trial, with about twenty good friends, Joseph
started for Monmouth and reached there the following day. The people
were very curious to see him. The different ministers had stirred up a
great deal of hatred, and a mob tried to seize him but the sheriff kept
them back. The trial did not take place that day and Joseph was held
secure in prison until the 9th.

Six prominent lawyers with bravery enough to defend an unpopular cause,
appeared in court for Joseph, and they advanced two strong reasons
why the Prophet should not be sent back to Missouri. The first one
was that the order for arrest, having been sent out once and returned
to Governor Carlin, became void and could not be served again; and
the second was, that the action of Missouri had been illegal and the
indictment of the Prophet was obtained through fraud and bribery.
Stephen A. Douglas was the judge, and he ordered the Prophet to be set
free on account of the reason given. Many of the lawyers on the other
side had been hired by religious people and some had even come from
Missouri to take part in the case.

Mr. O. H. Browning, who later became secretary of the interior in
President Johnson's cabinet, was the principal attorney for Joseph,
and after arguing upon the points of law, he spoke of the injustice of
sending the Prophet back to Missouri to be murdered by the ruffians of
that state. He told of the sufferings the Saints had endured, and so
pitiful was the story that many were weeping when he closed. These were
the last words of his address:

    Great God! have I not seen it? Yes, mine eyes have beheld the
    blood-stained traces of innocent women and children in the drear
    winter, who had traveled hundreds of miles barefoot through frost
    and snow, to seek a refuge from their savage pursuers. It was a
    scene of horror, sufficient to enlist sympathy from an admantine
    heart. And shall this unfortunate man, whom their fury has seen
    proper to select for sacrifice, be driven into such a savage land,
    and none dare to enlist in the cause of justice? If there was no
    other voice under heaven ever to be heard in this cause, gladly
    would I stand alone, and proudly spend my last breath, in defense
    of an oppressed American citizen.

Elder Amasa Lyman, who was with Joseph at this trial, delivered a
sermon at the request of a number of people, on the evening of this
day, and a much better feeling for the Prophet and the Saints sprang up
as a result. Many, of course, remained bitter and spread all kinds of
lies concerning Judge Douglas and the trial, but all fair-minded people
said that the decision was just. There was much rejoicing when the
Prophet reached Nauvoo, for all expected that this would be the end of
persecution from Missouri.

In July and the following months, six of the Apostles came home from
their mission to England, and this brought joy to the heart of Joseph.
The burden of governing the Church was growing very heavy, and he
needed these true, prudent men about him to aid in the great work.
They were all dear friends of his, and he bore them a love that only
faithful followers of Jesus can feel for one another. But his happiness
for their return and his release from danger was saddened by the death
of Don Carlos, his youngest brother, who died on the 7th of August.
When only fourteen years of age, this boy had begun his missionary work
and traveled with his father preaching the Gospel. He had gone on other
missions later and at the age of nineteen was ordained president of the
High Priest's quorum. At the time of his death, in his twenty-sixth
year, he was one of the city councilors and brigadier-general of the
Nauvoo Legion.

About this time the Prophet was visited by a large band of Sac and
Fox Indians. Some of them had read the Book of Mormon and wished to
know more about the man who had interpreted this great record of their
fathers. Joseph told them of the beginning of their people, and that
God had promised they should be white and beautiful again when they
became righteous. He counseled them to bury the hatchet forever and to
live no more for war and slaughter but to turn to lives of peace. When
he had finished, Keokuk, one of the chiefs, said, "I believe you are
a great and good man; I look rough, but I also am a son of the Great
Spirit. I have heard your advice; and we intend to quit fighting, and
follow the good advice you have given us."

At a general conference, held in the grove at Nauvoo, beginning October
2nd and lasting for three days, the doctrine of baptism for the dead
was publicly preached by the Prophet. This had been taught already
to the Apostles and others, but not to the whole Church. The Saints
were filled with joy when they learned that their fathers, mothers
and other relatives and all the spirits that had passed away without
a knowledge of the truth might yet receive salvation equal to their
own. Some baptisms had already been performed, but now the Prophet
said that there should be no more until they could be carried on in
the temple. It was a month before the baptismal font was ready for
use, and soon after it was dedicated by President Young, baptizing was
again commenced. In February, 1842, Apostles John Taylor and Wilford
Woodruff began to publish _The Times and Seasons_, and in the next
month Joseph became editor of this paper. This was the fourth Church
paper that had been set up and published. In this same month of March,
under the direction of the Prophet, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo
was founded. You all know how much good the Relief Societies are doing
at the present time, and this was the first in the Church. Emma Smith,
Joseph's wife, was made president and Eliza R. Snow was secretary.



CHAPTER XXXV.

1842.

BENNETT'S PLOTS TO DESTROY THE PROPHET--A PROPHECY--JOSEPH CHARGED WITH
BEING AN ACCESSORY TO THE ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF BOGGS--HIS ARREST
AND TRIAL--SET AT LIBERTY.

There are few things that will drive the Spirit of the Lord away from a
man or woman or a boy or girl so quickly as impurity. Hundreds of men
have fallen in this Church, some from the position of Apostles even,
because they were not virtuous. There are few instances that illustrate
this better than the fall of John C. Bennett. He was a man of great
ability, had a good education and had become very prominent among
the Saints. But he did not resist temptation, and the Spirit of God
withdrew from him. Then he began to draw others into his wickedness.
He told a number of men and women that the Prophet had said that the
members of the Church need not be chaste. Some of them sinned with him.
He even went further, and began plotting to kill Joseph.

Bennett was major-general of the Nauvoo Legion and on the 7th of May,
1842, a sham battle was arranged, in which the twenty-six companies of
the Legion, numbering two thousand men, were to take part. Joseph was
lieutenant-general and he took his place with the visitors, in such a
position as to be able to overlook the battle. Bennett, the traitor,
tried to get him alone into a certain position in the ranks, where, as
later turned out, he could be shot by some of Bennett's friends, and,
amid the noise and smoke, the real person could never be told. The
Spirit of the Lord prompted Joseph not to go, and revealed to him the
wickedness of his former friend, so the plot failed. Shortly after this
Bennett resigned his position as mayor and was cut off the Church, but
with tears in his eyes he pleaded for his standing, and mercy was shown
unto him.

After forgiveness had been given he went before Daniel H. Wells,
who was not then a member of the Church, and stated upon his oath
that Joseph had never taught him "anything contrary to the strictest
principles of the Gospel, or of virtue, or of the laws of God or man,
under any circumstance, or upon any occasion, either directly or
indirectly in word or deed." He also made public confession of his
wrongdoing and all the falsehoods he had told concerning the Prophet.
It was not long, however, before he again fell into sin, and then
he was cut off the Church and the world was warned against him as a
wicked, impure man. He now turned his spite upon the Prophet and the
Church and became the author of the most frightful lies. It was largely
due to him that persecution again sprang up. John C. Bennett might have
lived an honorable life, held important positions of trust and been a
favored servant of God, if he had resisted temptation. He now became an
enemy of the truth, was a murderer in his heart, and after a short life
of crime, died a most wretched death.

One day Joseph crossed the Mississippi river from Nauvoo to Montrose,
on the Iowa shore, in company with a number of prominent Free Masons.
He was waiting for them in the shade of the Masonic building while
they finished up their business on the inside, when the subject of
the Missouri persecutions came up and Joseph made a prophecy. He said
that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be
driven to the Rocky Mountains. Many would apostatize, others would be
put to death or lose their lives through exposure and disease, but some
of those present would live to go and help make settlements and build
cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the
Rocky Mountains. This prophecy was made on the 6th of August, 1842,
five years before any Latter-day Saint ever saw the valley of the Great
Salt Lake.

Two days after this, on the 8th of August, the Prophet and Orrin Porter
Rockwell were arrested by the sheriff and two deputies of Adams county,
on the charge of murder. Three months before, Lilburn W. Boggs was
found one night lying in his bed at his home in Independence, Jackson
county, with three bullet wounds in the head. These were not fatal and
he soon recovered. The report was spread that the Mormons had done this
to punish Boggs for the murders of the Saints which he had sent the
mob to do; but there was no evidence to show that any member of the
Church had been in the slightest degree connected with the crime. In
the latter part of July, almost three months after the shooting, Boggs
swore out a complaint against Orrin P. Rockwell for having tried to
murder him, and against Joseph Smith as his aid in the crime.

Boggs had applied to Governor Reynolds of Missouri, and Reynolds had
applied to Governor Carlin of Illinois, for the arrest of the Prophet
and Brother Rockwell as fugitives from justice. Thousands of people had
seen Joseph at Nauvoo on the day that Boggs had been shot. Certainly he
had not been in Missouri, and therefore had not fled from the state.
According to his right, the Prophet demanded that they be taken to the
city court of Nauvoo for a hearing. This the officers refused to allow
but seeming not to know what their duties really were, they went back
to Quincy to consult with Governor Carlin. When they came back, two
days later, Brother Rockwell had gone east, and Joseph had hid himself,
not wishing to be taken, contrary to law, back to Missouri. The sheriff
tried to frighten Emma into telling where Joseph was, by threatening
her if she refused, but it was of no use.

During more than four months the Prophet was hiding at Nauvoo and the
neighboring country, though once he same suddenly before the people and
preached to them. During this time he wrote important letters to the
Saints, especially on the subject of baptism for the dead. All kinds
of tricks were tried in order to capture him. A reward of $1,300 was
offered for his arrest, and the threat was made that if he was not
found the mob would come upon Nauvoo and burn the city. On hearing this
last, the Prophet told Wilson Law, who had been made major-general,
that though the Saints would make every sacrifice that God or man
could require at their hands to preserve peace, yet they should defend
themselves if necessary.

At length, relying on the advice of Mr. Butterfield, an able lawyer who
had become Joseph's attorney, and the promise of Thomas Ford, who had
been elected governor of Illinois after the end of Carlin's term, the
Prophet permitted himself to be arrested by Wilson Law on the 26th of
December, and, with a company of brethren, set out for Springfield, the
capital of Illinois, to be tried before the circuit court.

On the last day of the year 1842, the Prophet was released by Judge
Pope on two thousand dollar bonds to appear for trial the following
week. The court house was crowded with people. Some were friendly to
the Prophet and others were his enemies, but all wished to see him.
After he was set free, he went to visit Governor Ford and on his way he
passed between two walls of people. Soon after this a loose team went
dashing past the State house and somebody called out, "Joseph Smith the
Mormon Prophet is running away." The legislature at once dismissed and
the members came running out of doors to take part in the excitement.
The Prophet had grown to be a very interesting person to them. Next
morning being Sunday, the State house was offered for the purpose of
holding a meeting. Orson Hyde and John Taylor preached to a great
congregation.

The trial was held on the 4th of January, 1843, and after a powerful
argument by Mr. Butterfield, Judge Pope decided that the whole action
of the Missouri and Illinois officers, in trying to take the Prophet
and carry him away for trial, was illegal. By this decision Joseph
was given his liberty again. He returned to Nauvoo on the 10th of
January and the Saints were overjoyed to see him in safety again. The
Twelve Apostles set apart the 17th of that month as a day of humility,
fasting, praise, thanksgiving and prayer. This day was kept, and all
were truly grateful to God for having preserved the Prophet's life.
Next day Joseph and Emma gave a banquet to many of the Saints in honor
of the fifteenth anniversary of their marriage.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

1843.

A BLOODY WAR PREDICTED--THE PROPHET'S INTERVIEW WITH STEPHEN A.
DOUGLAS--A PROPHECY--THE CELESTIAL ORDER OF MARRIAGE--JOSEPH KIDNAPPED
AND ABUSED--HE ENTERTAINS THE MEN WHO SOUGHT TO TAKE HIS LIFE.

When Judge Pope declared that Joseph was a free man again after the
trial at Springfield, on the fifth of January, 1843, a few months of
peace followed his long hiding. It was a happy, busy time for the
Prophet--a time when many prophecies were uttered by him and much
precious truth given to the Saints. In the early part of this year
there was a great stir made about the prophecy of a man named Miller
who said that Jesus and the day of judgment were to come on April 3rd.
A committee of young men came from New York to see Joseph about this,
and he said positively that the Lord would not come in the year 1843 to
reign in this world. At a later time in a conference, he declared to
the Saints that Jesus would not come before he, Joseph, was eighty-five
years old.

Orrin P. Rockwell was captured by the Missourians and thrown into
prison in the month of March, and when the Prophet heard it, he
prophesied in the most positive terms that Brother Rockwell would get
away honorably from his captors.

One night about the same time Joseph, Wilford Woodruff and Willard
Richards saw a great streak of light in the sky in the shape of a sword
with the hilt downward. The Prophet told them that as sure as God sits
on a throne in heaven, so sure would there be a bloody war, and the
flaming sword was a certain sign thereof. A short time after this he
repeated the prophecy that the bloodshed should begin in South Carolina.

On the eighteenth of May, Joseph passed through Quincy, and on the
invitation of Stephen A. Douglas, stopped and dined with him. Judge
Douglas asked for an account of the Missouri persecutions, and when
Joseph finished it, Douglas spoke in the strongest terms against Boggs
and the other officials and said that they should be punished. After
dinner Joseph said to his host:

    Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States, and
    if you ever turn your hand against the Latter-day Saints, you will
    feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will
    live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you, for
    the conversation of this day will be with you through life.

The prophecy was fulfilled. Douglas did turn his hand against the
Latter-day Saints, in the hope of winning favor thereby, and when he
ran for president against Abraham Lincoln in the fall of 1860, he was
defeated, and soon after died.

A great trial came to the Prophet in the latter part of his life and a
very severe test was made of his willingness to obey the word of God
unto him. The Lord revealed that He wished his faithful servants to
take more than one wife, as did the patriarchs and righteous men of
old. This was so new and strange a practice that the Prophet hesitated
and did not at once obey. He put it off from time to time until at
length an angel of God appeared before him with a drawn sword, and said
that unless he obeyed the command to teach this doctrine and establish
it his priesthood would be taken from him and he would be destroyed.

Of course two warnings of this kind were not needed, and Joseph at once
began to teach Hyrum and other faithful, true men the will of the Lord.
He told Emma, his wife, but at first she looked at it as he had done.
After a struggle she consented that her husband take other wives and
she herself gave them unto him. Even then Joseph did not think it wise
to make the revelation public, and not until the twelfth day of July
was it written down. Just one month later it was read before the High
Council at Nauvoo, by Hyrum Smith. In speaking on the principle Hyrum
declared that those who accepted it would be blessed with the Spirit
of God and the confidence of the Saints, while those who rejected it
should lose their faith and power, and this proved true.

The Prophet was not engaged entirely in spiritual matters during the
first half of 1843. He had been elected mayor of Nauvoo, and gave much
attention to his various duties. He was full of life and vigor and kept
up his athletic practices. It was during this time that he met William
Wall, a champion wrestler of Ramus, Illinois, and had a friendly bout
with him. It must have been a fine thing to see those two powerful men
struggling with all the skill they had for the mastery, but Wall had
met a match and Joseph came off victor.

In the month of June a plot was laid for Bennett, the apostate, and
Samuel Owens, the old leader of the Jackson county mobs, to bring
Joseph back to Missouri. They worked upon Governors Reynolds and Ford;
and two men, Sheriff Reynolds of Jackson county and Sheriff Wilson of
Hancock county, were sent to capture him. The Prophet was visiting near
Dixon, about one hundred and fifty miles from Nauvoo, when the two
officers, disguised as Mormon missionaries, came to the house where
he was staying and said, "We want to see Brother Joseph." As soon as
he came to the door they drew their pistols and threatened, with many
curses, to kill him. He told them to shoot, he was not afraid to die,
but he demanded that they show some writ on which they made the arrest.

They had no writ to show, but they struck him with their pistols,
dragged him to the wagon and tried to drive away. Stephen Markham,
however, held the horses although the officers swore they would shoot
him, until Emma brought Joseph's coat and hat. It was eight miles to
Dixon, and on the way these bad men kept striking him and punching him
in the sides with their pistols. When they reached the tavern, where
they changed horses, the Prophet was almost fainting. A great spot on
each side was black and blue from their blows.

Brother Markham had followed the kidnappers on horseback to Dixon,
and before they could get away, he told the story of the outrage
and secured a lawyer. The brutal officers were arrested and placed
in charge of Sheriff Campbell and Joseph was given a writ of habeas
corpus, which permitted him to have a hearing before the circuit court
at Ottowa.

Next day Joseph, in the hands of Reynolds and Wilson, and they in the
hands of Sheriff Campbell, started out. They stopped at night at Papaw
grove, where the Prophet was asked to preach. Reynolds jumped up and
yelled that the people must disperse, but an old man with a thick cane
walked up and said to the Missourian:

"You damned infernal puke, we'll learn you to come here and interrupt
our gentlemen. Sit down there, and sit still. Don't you open your head
until General Smith gets through talking. If you never learned manners
in Missouri, we'll teach you that gentlemen are not to be imposed upon
by a nigger-driver. You cannot kidnap men here."

Reynolds knew that he would be lynched if he did not behave, and he
sat down very quietly. The Prophet spoke for an hour and a half on
marriage, the subject called for by the audience.

Judge Caton of the circuit court was found to be in New York. A new
writ was made out and the party started for Quincy to have the trial
before Judge Douglas. Stephen Markham rode quickly on horseback toward
Nauvoo, but on the way met one hundred and seventy-five men, who,
hearing that the Prophet was being kidnapped, had come to rescue him.

When they met him some of them burst into tears and threw their arms
about him. Joseph said to Reynolds and Wilson, "I think I will not go
to Missouri this time, gentlemen, these are my boys." The two sheriffs
were frightened nearly to death, thinking they were going to be
punished at once, and Reynolds asked, "Is Jem Flack in the crowd?" Some
one answered that the Missourian would see him the next day. With a
doleful look Reynolds whined, "Then I am a dead man, for I know him of
old." The Prophet, however, gave the officers his pledge that no harm
should be done them.

It was decided by Joseph's lawyers and the others that the trial might
be held at Nauvoo instead of Quincy and this was very pleasing to the
Prophet. Reynolds and Wilson, however, kept plotting to get Joseph into
the hands of his enemies. They wished to take him to the mouth of Rock
river, which flowed into the Mississippi, where a band of their friends
were waiting to help them, but Sheriff Campbell, who had them under
arrest, took away their arms and kept them from again running away with
the Prophet.

Before they reached Nauvoo one of the lawyers for the kidnappers
challenged any of the party to wrestle at side-hold for a wager.
Stephen Markham offered to wrestle him for fun and the lawyer threw
him. Joseph's enemies, lacking the spirit of true sport, began making
fun of Brother Markham and his friends. The Prophet turned to Philemon
C. Merrill, a young man, and said, "Get up and throw that man."

Brother Merrill was not a side-hold wrestler and he hesitated, but
Joseph again commanded him in such a tone that the young man waited to
offer no excuse. He stood up, held up his arms and told the lawyer to
choose his hold. He did not object when his opponent put his right arm
under. The Prophet said: "Philemon, when I count three, throw him." As
soon as the signal was given, Brother Merrill swung the lawyer over his
shoulder and threw him, head downward, to the ground. All who saw the
act were filled with awe.

At Nauvoo all was gladness at the Prophet's safe return. Hyrum took
his brother in his arms and wept for joy. A feast was prepared at the
Prophet's house and Reynolds and Wilson with about fifty others sat
down at the table. Emma entertained these men who had tried to kidnap
and murder her husband, as if they were guests of honor, but so brutal
had they become that when they left Nauvoo they went to Carthage and
tried to raise the militia to come upon the city of the Saints. This
Governor Ford was wise enough to refuse. Joseph was set free by the
court at Nauvoo, and for a time his troubles were at an end.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

1843-1844.

THE PROPHET A MODEL OF PERFECT MANHOOD--APOSTASY OF MEN WHO HAD BEEN
HIS FRIENDS--CHRISTMAS DAY--THE PROPHET A CANDIDATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY
OF THE UNITED STATES--PREDICTION CONCERNING THE SAINTS--THE WORK OF HIS
ENEMIES.

The last time of peace in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith had
come, and even this peace was broken by the mutterings of a storm that
was about to break upon him and crush out his dear life. At this time
Joseph was as complete a man, and his life was as nearly perfect,
as can be found among mortal men in all the history of this world.
He had an almost faultless body. He was full of physical strength
and courage and possessed the best of health. His mind was great and
vigorous. He had a broader view of politics and philosophy than the
deepest politicians and philosophers of the world. He was living near
unto God, and enjoyed the presence of that best companion, the Holy
Ghost. He felt that his end was near and this seemed to raise him above
the conditions and weaknesses of mortal men. He had so many exalted
thoughts and doctrines to teach the Saints, and he strove so hard to
make them understand! Oh, his life was indeed beautiful!

There were many things that saddened these last few months. Meetings
were held by his enemies to rouse the spirit of hate against him, but
more serious and more sorrowful was the fall of some of the men who had
been his dear friends and companions. Wilson Law, who only a short time
before had spoken burning words of truth in defense of Joseph, having
given way to temptation, lost his former love and became a bitter
enemy. William Law, Francis and Chauncey Higbee, Robert and Charles
Foster, followed the same course. Even Sidney Rigdon lost the spirit of
the Gospel and would have been rejected by the Saints, if Hyrum had not
pleaded for mercy. Joseph knew too well Sidney's true condition and no
longer gave him his trust and confidence.

Early Christmas morning of 1843, Joseph and Hyrum awoke thinking they
heard the sweet singing of angels. The song was, "Mortals awake, with
angels join." They rose from their bed, and, going to the window saw
below them in the hazy light of dawn, a group of women and children who
were singing this Christmas carol. The melody filled their hearts with
tenderness and joy, and after the song was ended, Joseph pronounced
a blessing upon the singers. That same Christmas day, Orrin Porter
Rockwell, with long hair, looking rough and wild, appeared among
the company gathered at the Prophet's home. He had been set free
from the Missouri prison and came away honorably as the Prophet had
prophesied. He told a thrilling story of his adventures, and one little
circumstance he related shows his character.

Knowing that Joseph had great confidence in Porter, Reynolds had tried
to persuade him to go and lead the Prophet into a trap so that the
Missourians could catch him. They promised Brother Rockwell great
rewards and safety--almost anything he wished if he would but act the
traitor. Reynolds said to him, "You only deliver Joe Smith into our
hands and name your pile." But Porter replied, "I will see you all
damned first, and then I won't."

In the spring of 1844, many leading men asked Joseph to permit them
to name him as a candidate for the presidency of the United States.
After much thought and prayer he consented, and on the twenty-ninth
of January, he was nominated at Nauvoo. One week later he wrote an
address to the people of the United States, giving his ideas of what
the President and Congress should do. He was not the choice of either
the Democratic or Whig party, but he had principles of his own that
were far in advance of the politics of that day. He declared that
slavery was wrong, but said that the slaves should be bought and set
free by the government. Just think of the millions of lives that would
have been saved and the millions of dollars also, if his plan for the
freedom of the slaves had been accepted! In the spring some of the
Apostles and many of the Elders went out to the states to speak in
favor of Joseph's election.

While the Prophet was working for peace in the nation and working for
peace toward the Saints, his enemies were holding meetings to plan
for his destruction. One of these was at Carthage, on the seventeenth
of February, the very day that Joseph sent out an appeal to the good
people of the state for peace. The meeting was made up of men whose
later actions showed that they were willing to murder in order to do
away with the Prophet, and yet they appointed, awful as it was, a day
for fasting and prayer, thinking, no doubt, that this would make their
bloody work appear as righteousness to the world.

You remember a short time before this Joseph had prophesied that the
Saints would go to the Rocky Mountains, and there become a mighty
people. When he saw trouble gathering, his mind turned toward the West.
He directed exploring parties to prepare themselves and go out to look
for a suitable resting place for the Saints, when their next move
should come. In civilization there seemed no rest for them. Many times
he referred to the subject and directed the Apostles to secure strong,
prudent men and send them out. Many volunteered and prepared themselves
to go.

Joseph at this time prophesied that within five years the Saints should
be out of the power of mobs and apostates. He did not live to see this
fulfilled, but you know how true the prophecy was. By February of 1849,
five years from the time that the Prophet uttered it, the body of the
Church was in Salt Lake valley, one thousand miles from their old
persecutors.

A special conference of the Church was held at Nauvoo, beginning the
sixth of April, 1844. The seventh was Sunday and twenty thousand Saints
gathered to hear the Prophet speak. Elder King Follett, a faithful man
who had been in prison with Parley P. Pratt in Missouri, had died a
few days before, and Joseph's mind was drawn to the eternal glory that
this man and other faithful Saints will obtain. For three and a half
hours, in power rested the Holy Ghost upon him and he spoke. His voice
was like the voice of an angel, and the people sat motionless, almost
breathless, listening to hear every word.

The Laws and Fosters could no longer hide their wickedness and they
were publicly cut off the Church. Now began their lawless, murderous
course. Before the week had passed a number of them were arrested and
fined for the assault and resisting officers of the law. Joseph was
determined that they should not deceive innocent Saints, and before
they were cut off he laid open their wickedness in public, and their
thirst for his blood grew stronger within them. William Law and others
went to Carthage and swore to a complaint before the circuit court,
charging the Prophet with polygamy and perjury.

Joseph heard that an order for his arrest was out, and so on the
twenty-fifth of May, he went of his own free will to Carthage to give
himself up. He obtained lawyers there and wished to have the case tried
at once, but the other side succeeded in having it delayed until the
next term of court. Joseph was left in the hands of a sheriff, who
knowing the Prophet's honor let him go free. He learned from some of
the apostates, who were not so bitter as others, that a plot had been
formed to murder him that night at Carthage. Hyrum and others of his
friends were with him, and when the mob was not expecting it, they
left Carthage and went rapidly toward Nauvoo. Joseph rode his favorite
horse, a beautiful animal which he called Joe Duncan. They reached home
soon after dark by rapid riding.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

1844.

THE PLOT OF AN APOSTATE--THE PUBLICATION OF THE NAUVOO
"EXPOSITOR"--DECLARED A NUISANCE AND ABATED AS SUCH--JOSEPH'S LAST
PUBLIC SPEECH--HE AND HIS BROTHER HYRUM LEAVE NAUVOO--RETURN TO THE
CITY--"I AM GOING LIKE A LAMB TO THE SLAUGHTER."

The mutterings of that storm of hatred, lies and murder changed to the
storm itself when the _Nauvoo Expositor_ came out on the seventh of
June, 1844. It was a weekly newspaper printed by the Laws, Higbees and
Fosters, and was filled with the apostate spirit. Joseph and Hyrum were
the main objects of its lying attacks. It also urged that the charter
of Nauvoo be withdrawn on account of the fraud and crimes which, it
said, were practiced under it. On this same day Robert Foster came
to the Prophet and asked to see him alone, saying he wished to come
back into the Church. Joseph refused to see him without witnesses, and
as they spoke he pointed to Foster's breast and said, "What have you
concealed there?" Foster confessed it was his pistol, and after a few
more words, left the house, promising to come back, but he never came.
It was soon learned that he had wished to draw Joseph off alone and
then murder him.

Three days after the _Expositor_ came out, the city council met and
decided that this paper was a public nuisance, and, as in ordinary
cases, Marshal John P. Greene was directed to remove it. Taking a
number of men with him as assistants, he quietly went to the office,
took the press out of the building, broke it and pied the type. Joseph,
as mayor of the city, made a proclamation telling why this action had
been taken. It was simply self-protection. If the _Nauvoo Expositor_
had gone on, sooner or later mobs would have come upon Nauvoo, and the
city would have suffered the terrible fate of Far West.

The publishers hurried to Carthage and told their story. Constable
David Bettis worth was sent to arrest Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the
others who had been concerned in destroying the _Expositor_. Thomas
Morrison, justice of the peace at Carthage, had issued a warrant and
had directed the officers to bring the prisoners before him or some
other justice of the peace within the county. Joseph and Hyrum asked
that they be taken before a justice of the peace in Nauvoo, but the
constable said, "I will be damned but I will carry you before Justice
Morrison at Carthage." The brethren therefore obtained a writ of habeas
corpus from the city court of Nauvoo and after being examined were set
free.

Though Marshal Greene's action had been perfectly lawful and regular,
it was a somewhat unusual thing to do, and Joseph sent a statement
to Governor Ford when the excitement began to rise, telling plainly
the whole affair and offering to go to Springfield, the capital of
Illinois, to be tried by any court that could properly try the case.
Judge Thomas came to Nauvoo on the sixteenth and counseled Marshal
Greene, Joseph, Hyrum, John Taylor and the others who had taken part in
destroying the press, to go before a justice of the peace and be tried
for the offense, saying that if they were acquitted, he would be bound
to make the mob keep the peace. They went before Daniel H. Wells, who
was not then a member of the Church, and after a full careful trial,
were set free, Esquire Wells deciding that they were not guilty.

On the very day that this trial was held mobs began to gather. Hundreds
poured over the Mississippi river to have a hand in what they thought
would be bloody work, and the worst characters in the surrounding
country gathered, with muskets and cannon, to attack Nauvoo. As
commanding officer of the Nauvoo Legion, Joseph ordered his men to arms
and declared the city under martial law. He stood upon the platform in
full uniform and spoke to his soldiers and the Saints. It was his last
public address. As he spoke he drew his sword and stretched his arm
toward heaven, and standing there in the splendor of his manhood, he
uttered these words:

    "I call God and angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword
    with a firm and unalterable determination that this people shall
    have their legal rights, and be protected from mob violence, or
    my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water, and my body
    consigned to the silent tomb."

About this time the Prophet told a dream that he had had. He was riding
in a carriage with his guardian angel, and at the roadside he saw two
snakes coiled up together. The angel explained that these were Robert
Foster and Chauncey Higbee. Farther on William and Wilson Law dragged
him from his carriage, and after binding his hands, threw him into a
deep pit. Terrible beasts then fell upon Wilson and a serpent coiled
itself about William and they cried, "O, Brother Joseph, Brother
Joseph, save us or we perish." He told them that they had bound him and
thrown him into a pit and he could not help them. Then his angel came
and said, "Joseph, why are you here?" He replied, "Mine enemies fell
upon me and bound me and threw me into this pit." The angel took him by
the hand, drew him up, and they went on together.

Governor Ford came into Carthage three days after the Nauvoo Legion had
been called out, and at once sent to Joseph asking that a committee of
discreet men be sent to him from Nauvoo. Apostle John Taylor and Dr.
John M. Bernhisel, after hastily gathering a number of papers, set out
to lay the true condition of things before the governor. He talked with
them and read aloud their written statements while in the company of
the worst enemies of the Church, who continually interrupted him with
oaths and threats. He plainly showed that he was too weak, or at least
unwilling, to enforce the law. When Joseph and Hyrum learned this they
knew their only course to save Nauvoo, without giving themselves up to
slaughter, was to flee.

On the night of the twenty-second of June, while the tears were flowing
fast from their eyes, Joseph and Hyrum, in company with Willard
Richards, bade farewell to their families and Nauvoo and crossed the
Mississippi river. Orrin P. Rockwell rowed them over in a leaky skiff,
and on the way they used their boots and shoes to bale out the water to
keep from sinking. On the next morning they began to prepare actively
for their journey westward, having decided that they would go to the
Rocky Mountains, knowing that if they were absent from Nauvoo the mob
would hot attack the city.

As they were thus working, word came from Emma and many of those who
had pretended great friendship, asking Joseph to return to Nauvoo,
insinuating that he was a coward and was running from danger. Joseph
and Hyrum were men that could not bear this reproach. They at once set
out for home, and as they went Joseph said, "We are going back to be
butchered." Hyrum replied, "If we live or die, we will be reconciled to
our fate." As they walked to the river bank, Joseph, deep in thought,
fell behind, and some one called to him to hasten. He looked up and
said, "There is time enough for the slaughter."

Next morning, Joseph, with the seventeen others for whom the order of
arrest had first been made, started for Carthage. As they passed the
temple the Prophet gazed upon it and looked over the city, then in a
tender, sad tone he said to his companions: "This is the loveliest
place and these are the best people under the heavens; little do they
know the trials that await them." On their way they met Captain Dunn
with sixty troopers from Carthage. He had an order for the state
arms held by the Nauvoo Legion, from Governor Ford, and Joseph, as
lieutenant-general, signed this at his request. After this act the
Prophet said to those about him:

"I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's
morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all
men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and my blood
shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall yet be said of
me, 'He was murdered in cold blood.'"

Dunn feared to go to Nauvoo on the brutal errand of the governor,
and asked Joseph to go with him so that he might be safe. Though the
brethren were loth to give up their arms, fearing a repetition of
Independence and Far West, yet they had such faith in the Prophet's
command that they obeyed. These, you remember, were state arms and the
governor had a right according to law to demand them, though he was a
coward for doing so. Their obedience shows how willing the Saints were
to obey the law. Again bidding farewell, Joseph and Hyrum turned away
and left Nauvoo forever.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

1844.

UNDER THE GOVERNOR'S PLEDGE OF PROTECTION JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN GO
TO CARTHAGE--ARRESTED AND IMPRISONED--OCCURRENCES AT CARTHAGE--PLOT TO
MURDER THE PROPHET--GOVERNOR FORD'S COWARDICE AND TREACHERY.

The departure from Nauvoo was the beginning of the end. The brethren
reached Carthage about midnight, and found the mob awaiting them. As
they came up a flood of threats and curses poured out from the drunken
rabble. Governor Ford, hearing this, put his head out of the window and
begged the mob to go quietly to their quarters, promising to exhibit
the prisoners in the morning. They spent the rest of the night at an
inn where they found a number of apostates, who said openly that the
intention was to kill them.

Early next morning they gave themselves up to Constable Bettisworth,
who had made the arrest at Nauvoo, and then went to see the governor.
He had sent word to them before they reached Carthage that they would
be protected from harm, and now he gave his word and promised as
governor of Illinois that they should have protection and a fair trial.
When the visit was over Ford took them before the mob militia and
introduced the Prophet and Hyrum as Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith.
The Carthage Greys threw up their hats, drew their swords and yelled,
"We will introduce ourselves to the damned Mormons in a different
style." Ford answered, "You shall have the full satisfaction." Soon
after the Greys were put under guard for mutiny, but were at once set
free.

When the brethren returned to the tavern from their visit to the
governor, the leaders of the mob called on Joseph. They confessed he
did not look like a desperate man, but said that they could not see
his heart. He answered that he could see their hearts, that they were
filled with murder. He prophesied to them that they should see scenes
of blood and horror to their hearts' content. Many should face the
cannon's mouth and endure all the evil they knew of.

The brethren had come to Carthage to be tried before Justice Morrison
on the charge of riot, because he had issued the order for their
arrest and the governor was not satisfied to accept the judgment of
Daniel H. Wells or any other justice. But now in the afternoon of the
twenty-fifth they were brought before Robert F. Smith who was also
captain of the Carthage Greys and a more bitter enemy than Morrison.
The brethren were released on seven thousand five hundred dollar bonds.

That morning Joseph and Hyrum had been arrested for treason and at
night the constable came with an order from Smith to take them to
prison. Their lawyers refused to permit them to go, since the action
was illegal, and Smith applied to the governor for advice. Ford said,
"You have the Carthage Greys at your command." The justice of the
peace, seeing the point, went with his men and dragged Joseph and Hyrum
to prison.

The night was spent in prayer by the prisoners and the brethren who had
gone with them. Next morning on Joseph's written request, Governor Ford
came and Joseph had a long talk with him. The Prophet explained the
whole situation, and Ford seemed perfectly satisfied. He pledged the
honor of himself and his officers to give the Prophet protection and he
promised that if he went to Nauvoo the following day, he would take him
back.

After Ford left, the brethren took turns in preaching to the guards.
Several times they were changed because the men refused to take any
part in doing such a terrible wrong to those whom they had grown
certain were innocent. At half past two in the afternoon the jailor
refused to give up the prisoners on the order from Justice Smith, as
Smith had no authority to demand them. Once more the governor advised
the use of the Carthage Greys in place of law, and the prisoners were
forcibly taken into court. The charge was treason, and for a long time
Smith refused to have witnesses from Nauvoo, but at length the trial
was put off until the twenty-ninth of June, three days later.

When they went back to prison that night, Hyrum, who seemed far more
hopeful than Joseph, read from the Book of Mormon comforting passages
that told how God in marvelous ways had delivered His servants. The
Prophet then bore his testimony in great power to the guards concerning
the truth of the Gospel, and late at night the prisoners lay down to
sleep. After a time Joseph whispered to Dan Jones who was lying beside
him, "Are you afraid to die?" and Brother Jones replied. "Has that time
come, think you? Engaged in such a cause, I do not think that death
would have many terrors." Then the Prophet whispered, "You will yet
see Wales and fulfill the mission appointed you, before you die." Next
morning Brother Jones left the prison to learn the cause of a disorder
outside during the night. Frank Worrel, one of the Carthage Greys, said:

"We have had too much trouble to bring old Joe here to let him escape
alive, and unless you want to die with him, you had better leave before
sundown; and you are not a damned bit better than him for taking his
part, and you'll see that I can prophesy better than old Joe, for
neither he nor his brother, nor anyone else who will remain with them,
will see the sun set today."

As Brother Jones went on he learned positively that the Carthage
Greys and others of the mob intended to kill the prisoners that day.
He hurried to the governor and found that Ford had decided to go to
Nauvoo, taking the best troops with him and leaving the prisoners in
the hands of the mob. He would not listen to what Brother Jones said,
and even refused to allow any of the Prophet's friends who were outside
the jail to go back, nor Apostles Taylor and Richards, who were inside,
to come out. Brother Jones went away and soon returned with Cyrus H.
Wheelock and John P. Greene. They urged the governor to remember his
promise and not to leave those whom he had pledged the honor of the
state to protect, to be murdered in cold blood; but Ford was too great
a coward to disappoint the mob. He set out for Nauvoo.

Perhaps the governor did not know for certain that the plot was to kill
the prisoners during his absence, and yet he knew the danger they were
in, for he said in his speech to the Saints:

"A great crime has been done by destroying the _Expositor_ press, and
placing the city under martial law, and a severe atonement must be
made, so prepare your minds for the emergency."

This was the afternoon, and as he spoke, a cannon in the distance was
heard. One of his aids whispered something in his ear and immediately
the governor with his officers and the troops rode away as though
in fear. It was probably the cannon fired near Carthage as a signal
that the mob had been successful in its foul work. While at Nauvoo
during the day, Ford and his friends had gone into the Temple and some
amused themselves by breaking the horns off the oxen that held up the
baptismal font, and the officers were heard to say time after time that
the Prophet would die that day.



CHAPTER XL.

1844.

THE PRISONERS IN CARTHAGE JAIL--SURROUNDED BY A MOB WITH
PAINTED FACES--THE MARTYRDOM--THE RETURN TO NAUVOO--FUNERAL AND
BURIAL--CONCLUSION.

When Governor Ford left Carthage on the morning of the twenty-seventh
of June, taking with him the friendly troops of Captain Dunn, he
disbanded all but the Carthage Greys, and left them to guard the
prison. Two hundred of the disbanded soldiers, with blackened faces
came to make the attack. When all was ready, the eight men at the door
of the jail loaded their muskets with blank cartridges and waited.

The four prisoners, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, John Taylor and Willard
Richards, spent a very dull, gloomy day, seemingly weighed down by the
terrible fate before them. In the afternoon, Brother Taylor sang this
beautiful hymn:

    A poor wayfaring man of grief, Hath often crossed me on my way, Who
    sued so humbly for relief That I could never answer nay.

    I had not power to ask his name; Whither he went or whence he came;
    Yet there was something in his eye That won my love, I knew not why.

    Once, when my scanty meal was spread, He entered--not a word he
    spake! Just perishing for want of bread, I gave him all; he blessed
    it, brake,

    And ate, but gave me part again; Mine was an angel's portion then,
    For while I fed with eager haste, The crust was manna to my taste.

    I spied him where a fountain burst, Clear from the rock--his
    strength was gone, The heedless water mocked his thirst, He heard
    it, saw it hurrying on.

    I ran and rais'd the suff'rer up; Thrice from the stream he drain'd
    my cup, Dipped and return'd it running o'er; I drank, and never
    thirsted more.

    'Twas night; the floods were out; it blew A winter hurricane aloof;
    I heard his voice, abroad, and flew To bid him welcome to my roof.

    I warm'd, I cloth'd, I cheered my guest, I laid him on my couch to
    rest: Then made the earth my bed, and seem'd In Eden's garden while
    I dream'd.

    Stripp'd, wounded, beaten nigh to death, I found him by the highway
    side; I rous'd his pulse, brought back his breath, Reviv'd his
    spirit, and supplied

    Wine, oil, refreshment--he was heal'd; I had myself a wound
    conceal'd; But from that hour forgot the smart, And peace bound up
    my broken heart.

    In prison I saw him next--condemn'd To meet a traitor's doom at
    morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemm'd, And honor'd him 'mid
    shame and scorn.

    My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked if I for him would
    die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit
    cried, "I will!"

    Then in a moment to my view, The stranger started from disguise;
    The tokens in his hands I knew, The Savior stood before mine eyes.

    He spake--and my poor name he nam'd--"Of me thou hast not been
    ashamed; These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not, thou didst
    them unto me."

    After this sweet song was ended the Prophet asked him to repeat it.
    He said that he had not the spirit of singing, but they urged him
    and he sang it again.

Shortly after five o'clock some of the brethren saw men with painted
faces running around the corner of the jail toward the stairs. There
was a cry of surrender. Three or four gun shots were heard and in
a moment the mob was at the door. The brethren placed their bodies
against it and held it shut. A pistol bullet was fired into the keyhole
to break the lock. Hyrum stepped back and a bullet through the door
panel struck him in the face and two through the window at the same
moment tore his flesh. He fell saying:

    _"I am a dead man."_

The door was forced open and gun barrels were thrust through. Joseph
fired three shots into the hallway from a pistol that had been left
with him by Brother Wheelock. Brothers Taylor and Richards with heavy
walking canes, tried to beat down the guns. The muskets belched great
flashes of fire into the room, and it seemed that in a moment they
would all be destroyed. John Taylor sprang to the window but a bullet
from the door pierced his thigh and he fell on the sill. He was
slipping out headfirst when another bullet from the outside struck his
watch and drove his body back into the room. To save himself he began
to crawl under the bed, when three other bullets splashed his blood
upon the walls.

Joseph saw his brother Hyrum dead on the floor and John Taylor
apparently dying. Willard Richards was still unharmed, and to save him,
the Prophet ran to the window intending to spring out. While he stood
for just an instant before making the leap, two bullets struck him from
behind and one from the mob below. His dying words were:

    _"Oh Lord, my God!"_

He smiled and fell to the ground--dead.

A hatless Missourian with bare legs and arms, ran to him and set his
body in a sitting position against the curb of a well. Colonel Levi
Williams ordered four men to shoot. They fired their bullets into the
Prophet's body, but he was past the power of men to hurt. The ruffian
who had placed the body against the curb, with gleaming knife in his
hand rushed to cut off the head and thus gain the reward offered by
enemies in Missouri. Suddenly a light from heaven burst upon the scene,
the knife fell to the ground, and the Missourian and the four men that
had shot Joseph were as if turned to stone. The mob in terror fled on
all sides, but Williams called them to take away their four companions.
They threw these into the wagon and then set off.

Willard Richards had suffered only a slight wound in the ear and after
hiding Brother Taylor under an old mattress in another cell, he went
out to learn whether the Prophet was really dead or not. Though he
thought the mob would kill him, he determined to find out Joseph's
fate. He came back and told the awful news to Apostle Taylor, and a
dull, lonely, sickening pain, more terrible than the pain from his
wounds, came over that faithful man. Doctor Richards prepared the
bodies of the Prophet and Patriarch, and early next morning, after
providing for Brother Taylor, started for Nauvoo.

Thousands of weeping Saints met the sorrowful procession. The bodies
were taken at once to Joseph's home and arranged for burial. Apostle
Richards and Colonel Stephen Markham and others spoke to the Saints,
telling them that vengeance belonged to God, and exhorting them to
remain at peace. Next morning the doors were opened and ten thousand
Saints passed by the coffins of the martyrs and looked upon their
beloved faces. At night the funeral was held, but bags of sand were
placed in the rough pine boxes where the caskets had been, and these
were buried. At midnight the bodies were carried by ten of the brethren
and were secretly buried under the foundation of the Nauvoo House,
from which place at a later time they were moved and again buried.
This secrecy was necessary for fear of those who would have robbed the
graves.

And this is the life and death of the man who was chosen, when the
foundations of the world were laid, to stand next to Jesus Christ,
the Only Begotten, in the importance of His work here upon the earth.
God took him in his youth and trained him in His own school. He was
a mortal man, but how splendid was his manhood, how glorious his
mortality! Like the Master, he died young, but like His also were the
mighty works he performed in that life. He died as he had lived, the
type of highest love. He offered his life for his friends and sealed
his testimony with his blood.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Latter-Day Prophet, by George Q. Cannon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LATTER-DAY PROPHET ***

***** This file should be named 56698.txt or 56698.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/6/9/56698/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Renah
Holmes.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

