The Project Gutenberg EBook of Aria da Capo, by Edna St. Vincent Millay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Aria da Capo

Author: Edna St. Vincent Millay

Release Date: May, 2004 [EBook #5790]
Posting Date: May 31, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARIA DA CAPO ***




Produced by David Starner







ARIA DA CAPO

A PLAY IN ONE ACT

Copyright, 1920

By Edna St. Vincent Millay

Printed in the U. S. A.



PERSONS

Pierrot

Columbine

Cothurnus, Masque of Tragedy

Thyrsis -\
         Shepherds
Corydon -/


   [Scene: A stage]

   [The curtain rises on a stage set for a Harlequinade, a merry
   black and white interior. Directly behind the footlights, and
   running parallel with them, is a long table, covered with a gay
   black and white cloth, on which is spread a banquet. At the
   opposite ends of this table, seated on delicate thin-legged
   chairs with high backs, are Pierrot and Columbine, dressed
   according to the tradition, excepting that Pierrot is in lilac,
   and Columbine in pink. They are dining.]

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, a macaroon! I cannot _live_ without a macaroon!

PIERROT: My only love,
You are _so_ intense! . . . Is it Tuesday, Columbine?--
I'll kiss you if it's Tuesday.

COLUMBINE: It is Wednesday,
If you must know . . . . Is this my artichoke,
Or yours?

PIERROT: Ah, Columbine,--as if it mattered!
Wednesday . . . . Will it be Tuesday, then, to-morrow,
By any chance?

COLUMBINE: To-morrow will be--Pierrot,
That isn't funny!

PIERROT: I thought it rather nice.
Well, let us drink some wine and lose our heads
And love each other.

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, don't you love
Me now?

PIERROT: La, what a woman!--how should I know?
Pour me some wine: I'll tell you presently.

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, do you know, I think you drink too much.

PIERROT: Yes, I dare say I do. . . . Or else too little.
It's hard to tell. You see, I am always wanting
A little more than what I have,--or else
A little less. There's something wrong. My dear,
How many fingers have you?

COLUMBINE: La, indeed,
How should I know?--It always takes me one hand
To count the other with. It's too confusing.
Why?

PIERROT: Why?--I am a student, Columbine;
And search into all matters.

COLUMBINE: La, indeed?--
Count them yourself, then!

PIERROT: No. Or, rather, nay.
'Tis of no consequence. . . . I am become
A painter, suddenly,--and you impress me--
Ah, yes!--six orange bull's-eyes, four green pin-wheels,
And one magenta jelly-roll,--the title
As follows: Woman Taking in Cheese from Fire-Escape.

COLUMBINE: Well, I like that! So that is all I've meant
To you!

PIERROT: Hush! All at once I am become
A pianist. I will image you in sound. . . .
On a new scale. . . , Without tonality. . .
Vivace senza tempo senza tutto. . . .
Title: Uptown Express at Six O'Clock.
Pour me a drink.

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, you work too hard.
You need a rest. Come on out into the garden,
And sing me something sad.

PIERROT: Don't stand so near me!
I am become a socialist. I love
Humanity; but I hate people. Columbine,
Put on your mittens, child; your hands are cold.

COLUMBINE: My hands are _not_ cold!

PIERROT: Oh, I am sure they are.
And you must have a shawl to wrap about you,
And sit by the fire.

COLUMBINE: Why, I'll do no such thing!
I'm hot as a spoon in a teacup!

PIERROT: Columbine,
I'm a philanthropist. I know I am,
Because I feel so restless. Do not scream,
Or it will be the worse for you!

COLUMBINE: Pierrot,
My vinaigrette! I cannot _live_ without
My vinaigrette!

PIERROT: My only love, you are
_So_ fundamental! . . . How would you like to be
An actress, Columbine?--I am become
Your manager.

COLUMBINE: Why, Pierrot, _I_ can't act.

PIERROT: Can't act! Can't act! La, listen to the woman!
What's that to do with the price of furs?--You're blonde,
Are you not?--you have no education, have you?--
Can't act! You underrate yourself, my dear!

COLUMBINE: Yes, I suppose I do.

PIERROT: As for the rest,
I'll teach you how to cry, and how to die,
And other little tricks; and the house will love you.
You'll be a star by five o'clock . . . that is,
If you will let me pay for your apartment.

COLUMBINE: _Let_ you?--well, that's a good one!
Ha! Ha! Ha!
But why?

PIERROT: But why?--well, as to that, my dear,
I cannot say. It's just a matter of form.

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, I'm getting tired of caviar
And peacocks' livers. Isn't there something else
That people eat?--some humble vegetable,
That grows in the ground?

PIERROT: Well, there are mushrooms.

COLUMBINE: Mushrooms!
That's so! I had forgotten . . . mushrooms . . . mushrooms. . . .
I cannot _live_ with . . . How do you like this gown?

PIERROT: Not much. I'm tired of gowns that have the waist-line
About the waist, and the hem around the bottom,--
And women with their breasts in front of them!--
Zut and ehe! Where does one go from here!

COLUMBINE: Here's a persimmon, love. You always liked them.

PIERROT: I am become a critic; there is nothing
I can enjoy. . . . However, set it aside;
I'll eat it between meals.

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, do you know,
Sometimes I think you're making fun of me.

PIERROT: My love, by yon black moon, you wrong us both.

COLUMBINE: There isn't a sign of a moon, Pierrot.

PIERROT: Of course not.
There never was. "Moon's" just a word to swear by.
"Mutton!"--now _there's_ a thing you can lay the hands on,
And set the tooth in! Listen, Columbine:
I always lied about the moon and you.
Food is my only lust.

COLUMBINE: Well, eat it, then,
For Heaven's sake, and stop your silly noise!
I haven't heard the clock tick for an hour.

PIERROT: It's ticking all the same. If you were a fly,
You would be dead by now. And if I were a parrot,
I could be talking for a thousand years!

    [Enter COTHURNUS.]

PIERROT: Hello, what's this, for God's sake?--
What's the matter?
Say, whadda you mean?--get off the stage, my friend,
And pinch yourself,--you're walking in your sleep!

COTHURNUS: I never sleep.

PIERROT: Well, anyhow, clear out.
You don't belong on here. Wait for your own scene!
Whadda you think this is,--a dress-rehearsal?

COTHURNUS: Sir, I am tired of waiting. I will wait
No longer.

PIERROT: Well, but whadda you going to do?
The scene is set for me!

COTHURNUS: True, sir; yet I
Can play the scene.

PIERROT: Your scene is down for later!

COTHURNUS: That, too, is true, sir; but I play it now.

PIERROT: Oh, very well!--Anyway, I am tired
Of black and white. At least, I think I am.

    [Exit COLUMBINE.]

Yes, I am sure I am. I know what I'll do!--
I'll go and strum the moon, that's what I'll do. . . .
Unless, perhaps . . . you never can tell . . . I may be,
You know, tired of the moon. Well, anyway,
I'll go find Columbine. . . . And when I find her,
I will address her thus: "Ehe, Pierrette!"--
There's something in that.

    [Exit PIERROT.]

COTHURNUS: You, Thyrsis! Corydon!
Where are you?

THYRSIS: [Off stage.] Sir, we are in our dressing-room!

COTHURNUS: Come out and do the scene.

CORYDON: [Off stage.] You are mocking us!--
The scene is down for later.

COTHURNUS: That is true;
But we will play it now. I am the scene.
[Seats himself on high place in back of stage.]

    [Enter CORYDON and THYRSIS.]

CORYDON: Sir, we are counting on this little hour.
We said, "Here is an hour,--in which to think
A mighty thought, and sing a trifling song,
And look at nothing."--And, behold! the hour,
Even as we spoke, was over, and the act begun,
Under our feet!

THYRSIS: Sir, we are not in the fancy
To play the play. We had thought to play it later.

CORYDON: Besides, this is the setting for a farce.
Our scene requires a wall; we cannot build
A wall of tissue-paper!

THYRSIS: We cannot act
A tragedy with comic properties!

COTHURNUS: Try it and see. I think you'll find you can.
One wall is like another. And regarding
The matter of your insufficient mood,
The important thing is that you speak the lines,
And make the gestures. Wherefore I shall remain
Throughout, and hold the prompt-book. Are you ready?

CORYDON-THYRSIS: [Sorrowfully.] Sir, we are always ready.

COTHURNUS: Play the play!

    [CORYDON and THYRSIS move the table and chairs to one side out
    of the way, and seat themselves in a half-reclining position
    on the floor.]

THYRSIS: How gently in the silence, Corydon,
Our sheep go up the bank. They crop a grass
That's yellow where the sun is out, and black
Where the clouds drag their shadows. Have you noticed
How steadily, yet with what a slanting eye
They graze?

CORYDON: As if they thought of other things.
What say you, Thyrsis, do they only question
Where next to pull?--Or do their far minds draw them
Thus vaguely north of west and south of east?

THYRSIS: One cannot say. . . . The black lamb wears its burdocks
As if they were a garland,--have you noticed?
Purple and white--and drinks the bitten grass
As if it were a wine.

CORYDON: I've noticed that.
What say you, Thyrsis, shall we make a song
About a lamb that thought himself a shepherd?

THYRSIS: Why, yes!--that is, why,--no. (I have forgotten my line.)

COTHURNUS: [Prompting.] "I know a game worth two of that!"

THYRSIS: Oh, yes. . . . I know a game worth two of that!
Let's gather rocks, and build a wall between us;
And say that over there belongs to me,
And over here to you!

CORYDON: Why,--very well.
And say you may not come upon my side
Unless I say you may!

THYRSIS: Nor you on mine!
And if you should, 'twould be the worse for you!

    [They weave a wall of colored crepe paper ribbons from the
    centre front to the centre back of the stage, fastening the
    ends to COLUMBINE'S chair in front and to PIERROT'S chair in
    the back.]

CORYDON: Now there's a wall a man may see across,
But not attempt to scale.

THYRSIS: An excellent wall.

CORYDON: Come, let us separate, and sit alone
A little while, and lay a plot whereby
We may outdo each other.
[They seat themselves on opposite sides of the wall.]

PIERROT: [Off stage.] Ehe, Pierrette!

COLUMBINE: [Off stage.] My name is Columbine!
Leave me alone!

THYRSIS: [Coming up to the wall.]
Corydon, after all, and in spite of the fact
I started it myself, I do not like this
So very much. What is the sense of saying
I do not want you on my side the wall?
It is a silly game. I'd much prefer
Making the little song you spoke of making,
About the lamb, you know, that thought himself
A shepherd!--what do you say?

[Pause.]

CORYDON: [At wall.] (I have forgotten the line.)

COTHURNUS: [Prompting.] "How do I know this isn't a trick?"

CORYDON: Oh, yes. . . . How do I know this isn't a trick
To get upon my land?

THYRSIS: Oh, Corydon,
You _know_ it's not a trick. I do not like
The game, that's all. Come over here, or let me
Come over there.

CORYDON: It is a clever trick
To get upon my land. [Seats himself as before.]

THYRSIS: Oh, very well! [Seats himself as before.]
[To himself.] I think I never knew a sillier game.

CORYDON: [Coming to wall.]
Oh, Thyrsis, just a minute!--all the water
Is on your side the wall, and the sheep are thirsty.
I hadn't thought of that.

THYRSIS: Oh, hadn't you?

CORYDON: Why, what do you mean?

THYRSIS: What do I mean?--I mean
That I can play a game as well as you can.
And if the pool is on my side, it's on
My side, that's all.

CORYDON: You mean you'd let the sheep
Go thirsty?

THYRSIS: Well, they're not my sheep. My sheep
Have water enough.

CORYDON: _Your_ sheep! You are mad, to call them
Yours--mine--they are all one flock! Thyrsis, you can't mean
To keep the water from them, just because
They happened to be grazing over here
Instead of over there, when we set the wall up?

THYRSIS: Oh, can't I?--wait and see!--and if you try
To lead them over here, you'll wish you hadn't!

CORYDON: I wonder how it happens all the water
Is on your side. . . . I'll say you had an eye out
For lots of little things, my innocent friend,
When I said, "Let us make a song," and you said,
"I know a game worth two of that!"

COLUMBINE: [Off stage.] Pierrot,
D'you know, I think you must be getting old,
Or fat, or something,--stupid, anyway!--
Can't you put on some other kind of collar?

THYRSIS: You know as well as I do, Corydon,
I never thought anything of the kind.
_Don't_ you?


CORYDON: I _do_ not.

THYRSIS: Don't you?

CORYDON: Oh, I suppose so.
Thyrsis, let's drop this,--what do you say?--it's only
A game, you know . . . we seem to be forgetting
It's only a game ... a pretty serious game
It's getting to be, when one of us is willing
To let the sheep go thirsty for the sake of it.

THYRSIS: I know it, Corydon.

    [They reach out their arms to each other across the wall.]

COTHURNUS: [Prompting.] "But how do I know--"

THYRSIS: Oh, yes. . . . But how do I know this isn't a trick
To water your sheep, and get the laugh on me?

CORYDON: You can't know, that's the difficult thing about it,
Of course,--you can't be sure. You have to take
My word for it. And I know just how you feel.
But one of us has to take a risk, or else,
Why, don't you see?--the game goes on forever! . . .
It's terrible, when you stop to think of it. . . .
Oh, Thyrsis, now for the first time I feel
This wall is actually a wall, a thing
Come up between us, shutting you away
From me. . . . I do not know you any more!

THYRSIS: No, don't say that! Oh, Corydon, I'm willing
To drop it all, if you will! Come on over
And water your sheep! It is an ugly game.
I hated it from the first. . . . How did it start?

CORYDON: I do not know . . . I do not know . . . I think
I am afraid of you!--you are a stranger!
I never set eyes on you before! "Come over
And water my sheep," indeed!--They'll be more thirsty
Than they are now before I bring them over
Into your land, and have you mixing them up
With yours, and calling them yours, and trying to
keep them!

    [Enter COLUMBINE]

COLUMBINE: [To COTHURNUS.] Glummy, I want my hat.

THYRSIS: Take it, and go.

COLUMBINE: Take it and go, indeed. Is it my hat,
Or isn't it? Is this my scene, or not?
Take it and go! Really, you know, you two
Are awfully funny!

    [Exit COLUMBINE]

THYRSIS: Corydon, my friend,
I'm going to leave you now, and whittle me
A pipe, or sing a song, or go to sleep.
When you have come to your senses, let me know.
[Goes back to where he has been sitting, lies down and sleeps.]

    [CORYDON, in going back to where he has been sitting, stumbles
    over bowl of colored confetti and colored paper ribbons.]

CORYDON: Why, what is this?--Red stones--and purple stones--
And stones stuck full of gold!--The ground is full
Of gold and colored stones! . . . I'm glad the wall
Was up before I found them!--Otherwise,
I should have had to share them. As it is,
They all belong to me. . . . Unless--

    [He goes to wall and digs up and down the length of it,
    to see if there are jewels on the other side.]

None here--
None here--none here--They all belong to me!
[Sits.]

THYRSIS: [Awakening.] How curious! I thought the little black lamb
Came up and licked my hair; I saw the wool
About its neck as plain as anything!
It must have been a dream. The little black lamb
Is on the other side of the wall, I'm sure.

    [Goes to wall and looks over. CORYDON is seated on the ground,
    tossing the confetti up into the air and catching it.]

Hello, what's that you've got there, Corydon?

CORYDON: Jewels.

THYRSIS: Jewels?--And where did you ever get them?

CORYDON: Oh, over here.

THYRSIS: You mean to say you found them,
By digging around in the ground for them?

CORYDON: [Unpleasantly.] No, Thyrsis,
By digging down for water for my sheep.

THYRSIS: Corydon, come to the wall a minute, will you?
I want to talk to you.

CORYDON: I haven't time.
I'm making me a necklace of red stones.

THYRSIS: I'll give you all the water that you want,
For one of those red stones,--if it's a good one.

CORYDON: Water?--what for?--what do I want of water?

THYRSIS: Why, for your sheep!

CORYDON: My sheep?--I'm not a shepherd!

THYRSIS: Your sheep are dying of thirst.

CORYDON: Man, haven't I told you
I can't be bothered with a few untidy
Brown sheep all full of burdocks?--I'm a merchant.
That's what I am!--And if I set my mind to it
I dare say I could be an emperor!
[To himself.] Wouldn't I be a fool to spend my time
Watching a flock of sheep go up a hill,
When I have these to play with?--when I have these
To think about?--I can't make up my mind
Whether to buy a city, and have a thousand
Beautiful girls to bathe me, and be happy
Until I die, or build a bridge, and name it
The Bridge of Corydon,--and be remembered
After I'm dead.

THYRSIS: Corydon, come to the wall,
Won't you?--I want to tell you something.

CORYDON: Hush!
Be off! Be off! Go finish your nap, I tell you!

THYRSIS: Corydon, listen: if you don't want your sheep,
Give them to me.

CORYDON: Be off! Go finish your nap.
A red one--and a blue one--and a red one--
And a purple one--give you my sheep, did you say?--
Come, come! What do you take me for, a fool?
I've a lot of thinking to do,--and while I'm thinking,
The sheep might just as well be over here
As over there. . . . A blue one--and a red one--

THYRSIS: But they will die!

CORYDON: And a green one--and a couple
Of white ones, for a change.

THYRSIS: Maybe I have
Some jewels on my side.

CORYDON: And another green one--
Maybe, but I don't think so. You see, this rock
Isn't so very wide. It stops before
It gets to the wall. It seems to go quite deep,
However.

THYRSIS: [With hatred.] I see.

COLUMBINE: [Off stage.] Look, Pierrot, there's the moon.

PIERROT: [Off stage.] Nonsense!

THYRSIS: I see.

COLUMBINE: [Off stage.] Sing me an old song, Pierrot,--
Something I can remember.

PIERROT: [Off stage.] Columbine.
Your mind is made of crumbs,--like an escallop
Of oysters,--first a layer of crumbs, and then
An oystery taste, and then a layer of crumbs.

THYRSIS: [Searching.] I find no jewels . . . but I wonder what
The root of this black weed would do to a man
If he should taste it. ... I have seen a sheep die,
With half the stalk still drooling from its mouth.
'Twould be a speedy remedy, I should think,
For a festered pride and a feverish ambition.
It has a curious root. I think I'll hack it
In little pieces. . . . First I'll get me a drink;
And then I'll hack that root in little pieces
As small as dust, and see what the color is
Inside. [Goes to bowl on floor.]

The pool is very clear. I see
A shepherd standing on the brink, with a red cloak
About him, and a black weed in his hand. . . .
'Tis I. [Kneels and drinks.]

CORYDON: [Coming to wall.] Hello, what are you doing, Thyrsis?

THYRSIS: Digging for gold.

CORYDON: I'll give you all the gold
You want, if you'll give me a bowl of water.
If you don't want too much, that is to say.

THYRSIS: Ho, so you've changed your mind?--It's different,
Isn't it, when you want a drink yourself?

CORYDON: Of course it is.

THYRSIS: Well, let me see ... a bowl
Of water,--come back in an hour, Corydon.
I'm busy now.

CORYDON: Oh, Thyrsis, give me a bowl
Of water!--and I'll fill the bowl with jewels,
And bring it back!

THYRSIS: Be off, I'm busy now.

[He catches sight of the weed, picks it up and looks
at it, unseen by CORYDON.]

Wait!--Pick me out the finest stones you have . . .
I'll bring you a drink of water presently.

CORYDON: [Goes back and sits down, with the jewels before him.]
A bowl of jewels is a lot of jewels.

THYRSIS: [Chopping up the weed.] I wonder if it has a bitter taste.

CORYDON: There's sure to be a stone or two among them
I have grown fond of, pouring them from one hand
Into the other.

THYRSIS: I hope it doesn't taste
Too bitter, just at first.

CORYDON: A bowl of jewels
Is far too many jewels to give away
And not get back again.

THYRSIS: I don't believe
He'll notice. He's too thirsty. He'll gulp it down
And never notice.

CORYDON: There ought to be some way
To get them back again. . . . I could give him a necklace,
And snatch it back, after I'd drunk the water,
I suppose. . . . Why, as for that, of course a _necklace_. . . .

    [He puts two or three of the colored tapes together and tries
    their strength by pulling them, after which he puts them around
    his neck and pulls them, gently, nodding to himself. He gets up
    and goes to the wall, with the colored tapes in his hands.]

    [THYRSIS in the meantime has poured the powdered root--black
    confetti--into the pot which contained the flower and filled
    it up with wine from the punch-bowl on the floor. He comes
    to the wall at the same time, holding the bowl of poison.]

THYRSIS: Come, get your bowl of water, Corydon.

CORYDON: Ah, very good!--and for such a gift as that
I'll give you more than a bowl of unset stones.
I'll give you three long necklaces, my friend.
Come closer. Here they are. [Puts the ribbons
about THYRSIS' neck.]

THYRSIS: [Putting bowl to CORYDON'S mouth.]
I'll hold the bowl
Until you've drunk it all.

CORYDON: Then hold it steady.
For every drop you spill I'll have a stone back
Out of this chain.

THYRSIS: I shall not spill a drop.

    [CORYDON drinks, meanwhile beginning to strangle
    THYRSIS.]

THYRSIS: Don't pull the string so tight.

CORYDON: You're spilling the water.

THYRSIS: You've had enough--you've had enough--stop pulling
The string so tight!

CORYDON: Why, that's not tight at all ...
How's this?

THYRSIS: [Drops bowl.] You're strangling me! Oh, Corydon!
It's only a game!--and you are strangling me!

CORYDON: It's only a game, is it?--Yet I believe
You've poisoned me in earnest! [Writhes and
pulls the strings tighter, winding them about
THYRSIS' neck.]

THYRSIS: Corydon! [Dies.]

CORYDON: You've poisoned me in earnest. . . . I feel so cold. . . .
So cold . . . this is a very silly game. . . .
Why do we play it?--let's not play this game
A minute more . . . let's make a little song
About a lamb. . . . I'm coming over the wall,
No matter what you say,--I want to be near you. . . .

    [Groping his way, with arms wide before him, he strides through
    the frail papers of the wall without knowing it, and continues
    seeking for the wall straight across the stage.]

Where is the wall?

    [Gropes his way back, and stands very near THYRSIS without
    seeing him; he speaks slowly.]

There isn't any wall,
I think.

    [Takes a step forward, his foot touches THYRSIS' body, and he
    falls down beside him.]

Thyrsis, where is your cloak?--just give me
A little bit of your cloak! . . .

    [Draws corner of THYRSIS' cloak over his shoulders, falls
    across THYRSIS' body, and dies.]

    [COTHURNUS closes the prompt-book with a bang, arises
    matter-of-factly, comes down stage, and places the table over
    the two bodies, drawing down the cover so that they are hidden
    from any actors on the stage, but visible to the audience,
    pushing in their feet and hands with his boot.  He then turns
    his back to the audience, and claps his hands twice.]

COTHURNUS: Strike the scene! [Exit COTHURNUS.]

    [Enter PIERROT and COLUMBINE.]

PIERROT: Don't puff so, Columbine!

COLUMBINE: Lord, what a mess
This set is in! If there's one thing I hate
Above everything else,--even more than getting my feet wet--
It's clutter!--He might at least have left the scene
The way he found it ... don't you say so, Pierrot?

    [She picks up punch bowl. They arrange chairs as before at ends
    of table.]

PIERROT: Well, I don't know. I think it rather diverting
The way it is.

[Yawns, picks up confetti bowl.]

Shall we begin?

COLUMBINE: [Screams.] My God!
What's that there under the table?

PIERROT: It is the bodies
Of the two shepherds from the other play.

COLUMBINE: [Slowly.] How curious to strangle him like that,
With colored paper ribbons.

PIERROT: Yes, and yet
I dare say he is just as dead. [Pauses. Calls.]
Cothurnus!
Come drag these bodies out of here! We can't
Sit down and eat with two dead bodies lying
Under the table! . . . The audience wouldn't stand for it!

COTHURNUS: (Off stage.) What makes you think so?--
Pull down the tablecloth
On the other side, and hide them from the house,
And play the farce. The audience will forget.

PIERROT: That's so. Give me a hand there,
Columbine.

    [PIERROT and COLUMBINE pull down the table cover in such a way
    that the two bodies are hidden from the house, then merrily set
    their bowls back on the table, draw up their chairs, and begin
    the play exactly as before.]

COLUMBINE: Pierrot, a macaroon,--I cannot _live_ without a macaroon!

PIERROT: My only love,
You are _so_ intense! ... Is it Tuesday, Columbine?--
I'll kiss you if it's Tuesday.

    [Curtains begin to close slowly.]

COLUMBINE: It is Wednesday,
If you must know. ... Is this my artichoke
Or yours?

PIERROT: Ah, Columbine, as if it mattered!
Wednesday. . . . Will it be Tuesday, then, to-morrow,
By any chance? . . .

[CURTAIN.]




AUTHOR'S NOTE

ON THE PLAYING PO

ARIA DA CAPO



ORIGINAL CAST

AS PLAYED BY THE PROVINCETOWN PLAYERS, NEW YORK CITY

PIERROT     HARRISON DOWD

COLUMBINE   NORMA MILLAY

COTHURNUS   HUGH FERRISS

CORYDON     CHARLES ELLIS

THYRSIS     JAMES LIGHT



AUTHOR'S NOTE

So great is my vexation always, when reading a play, to find its
progress constantly being halted and its structure loosened by
elaborate explanatory parentheses, that I resolved when I should
publish Aria da Capo to incorporate into its text only those
explanations the omission of which might confuse the reader or lend
a wrong interpretation to the lines.  Since, however, Aria da Capo
was written not only to be read but also to be acted, and being
conscious that the exclusion of the usual directions, while
clarifying the play to the reader, may make it bare of suggestions
and somewhat baffling to the producer, I am adding here some remarks
which have been found of value in preparing it for presentation on
the stage.

Since the production of Aria da Capo by the Provincetown Players, I
have received a great many letters from the directors of little
theatres, asking for copies of it with a view to producing it. Very
often, after I send the play, I receive a letter in reply asking for
some suggestions for its presentation, and enclosing direct
questions on points that have been difficult.  It occurred to me
finally that it would be reasonable to make up a sort of informal
prompt-book to send about with the play; and it is that which is
printed below. It will be found incomplete and uneven, in some
instances unnecessarily detailed, in others not sufficiently so; all
of which is due to the fact that it was put together loosely, from
answers to chance questions, rather than logically, as an entity in
itself.




SUGGESTIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF "ARIA DA CAPO"

SETTING:

The setting required is simple:--a grey curtain, a long black table,
two slender black high-backed chairs, and a raised platform.

Instead of wings and back-drop the Provincetown Players cleverly
utilized painted screens, the heights varying from 6 to 10 feet,
these being set right and left of the stage in such manner as to
give the effect of depth and distance.

The table, six feet long and two feet wide, has thin legs and is
painted black.

When Pierrot and Columbine enter in the final scene, it is not
necessary that the table which Cothurnus has replaced shall entirely
conceal the bodies of Thyrsis and Corydon. Pierrot and Columbine
must ignore them until the lines indicate their discovery, no matter
how they may have fallen.

Particular attention must be given to the chairs in this set. They
are used to construct the tissue-paper wall, and, although
delicate, should be heavy enough to remain solid and steady, up and
down stage, without the possibility of an upset when Corydon strides
through the wall.

Near the footlights (actors' left) are two sofa pillows, used to
represent the rocks against which the shepherds lean. On the left of
the stage have another pillow, which Thyrsis places under his head
when he lies down to sleep. Use cloth or crepe paper for these
pillows, and have them of spotted black and white material, or of
any gay color except red or blue.

Cothurnus occupies a chair upon a platform, up-stage, centre, with
two or three steps surrounding it on three sides. Drape this with
plain heavy black cloth.

The table covering is important. Its width is equal to that of the
added height and width of the table.  As it must be moved to cover
the bodies of Thyrsis and Corydon, it should be of sufficient weight
to prevent slipping. It will be well to experiment with this, to
ensure proper performance.

The cover should have black and white spots and striped ends.

The table is set as follows:--two large wooden bowls (at least seven
inches high and fourteen inches in diameter). One is placed at each
end of the table.  That at Columbine's end should contain
persimmons, pomegranates, grapes and other bright exotic fruits.
Pierrot's bowl has confetti and colored paper ribbons, the latter
showing plainly over the edge. (If Columbine uses practical
macaroons, put them into this bowl.)

Near Columbine, place a practical uncooked artichoke; have this of
good size, and nail it to a wooden standard, painted black. At both
places there are tall white wooden goblets.

In the centre of the table there should be a curious, grotesque, but
very gay flower, standing upright in a pot of wood or heavy paper,
which will not break when Thyrsis drops it. Concealed at the root of
this plant there should be a small sack of black confetti, to be
used in the "poison scene."

The table should be set with nothing but these articles, and yet
give the appearance of bounty and elegance.

Place the table parallel with the footlights,--the long side toward
the audience.

Columbine's chair is at the actors' right, and Pierrot's
opposite--Columbine's hat hangs from her chair-top. Both chairs are
festooned with tissue-paper ribbons, at least ten feet long, to be
used later by the shepherds to represent their wall. These must be
of such a texture as to break readily when Corydon walks through,
and a prearranged transverse tear or two will assist in the prompt
breakage when he does so.

PROPERTIES:

Two white wooden bowls, one filled with fruits and the other with
confetti and paper ribbons,--one ribbon to be of cotton or silk, in
order to be not too easily broken by Corydon when strangling Thyrsis

Two tall white wooden goblets

One artichoke nailed to a standard

One flower in paper or wooden pot, the root wrapped with black crepe
paper (or use confetti)

Black and white tablecloth

Macaroons

Boots and prompt-book for Cothurnus (large flat black book)

Also, if desired, mask of Tragedy for Cothurnus

Crepe or tissue streamers of different colors, including no red or
blue, for wall.


COSTUMES:

PIERROT: Lavender or lilac satin, preferably a blue-lavender. Care
should be taken that the lavender does not turn pink under the stage
lights. Pierrot's costume is the conventional smock with wide
trousers, with black crepe paper rosettes on the smock, wide white
tarleton ruff. Black evening pumps with black rosettes may be worn.
Black silk skull-cap.

COLUMBINE: Tight black satin bodice cut very low, with straps over
the shoulders, quite like the modern evening gown; very full
tarleton skirts of different shades of pink and cerise, reaching to
the knees; ruffled bloomers of apple-green tarleton, the ruffles
showing below the skirts; black silk stockings and black ballet
slippers, laced with green. Hat of lavender crepe paper, with
streamers of gay colors--including, however, no clear red or blue.
Hat should be small and very smart--not a _shepherdess_ hat.  Columbine
should be made up to suggest a doll. As originally interpreted she
had short light hair, standing out bushily all over her head. Long
hair should be rolled under to give a _bobbed_ effect, or could be
arranged in obvious caricature of some extreme modern style, but
must look attractive, and must be blonde.

COTHURNUS: Plain toga of dull purple in some heavy, unreflecting
material which will fall into large folds, lined with sombre
flame-color; a garment with large purple sleeves, of which only the
sleeves were visible, was worn under the toga,--but the effect should
be classical; heavy boots should be worn, as nearly as possible like
the tragic Roman buskin; one end of the great toga is tied into a
rough hood which covers the actor's head; a mask may be worn, but it
is often difficult to speak through, and, if desired, the actor's
face may be made up to represent a mask of Tragedy.

THYRSIS and CORYDON: These costumes, in striking contrast to the
elegance of those of Pierrot and Columbine, should be very simple,
and very roughly made; short tunics of outing-flannel or some such
material--fastened loosely over one shoulder,--one shoulder, as well
as most of the back and breast, exposed. Legs bare, or swathed from
the knee to the ankle in rough strips of the same material. Sandals.
Cloaks of heavier, cheap material fastened to the tunics in such a
way that they will appear to be simply flung over the shoulder, but
actually fastened very cleverly in order to avoid tripping the
shepherds, who are continually sitting down on the floor and getting
up again.

Thyrsis wears a dark grey tunic and cloak of raw bright red,--but not
a turkey-red, as this color will kill the blue of Corydon's cloak.
Corydon wears tunic of light grey and cloak of brilliant blue. There
must be no red or blue used anywhere in the entire play excepting in
the blue and red of these two cloaks.  The two shepherds must be so
strong and vivid in every way that when Columbine comes in and says,
"Is this my scene or not?" it will seem to the audience that it is
she, not the shepherds, who is hopelessly out of the scene.

CHARACTERS:

PIERROT: Pierrot sees clearly into existing evils and is rendered
gaily cynical by them; he is both too indolent and too indifferent
to do anything about it. Yet in several lines of the play his actual
unhappiness is seen, --for instance, "Moon's just a word to swear
by," in which he expresses his conviction that all beauty and
romance are fled from the world. At the end of the play the line,
"Yes, and yet I dare say he is just as dead," must not be said
flippantly or cynically, but slowly and with much philosophic
concentration on the thought. From the moment when Columbine cries,
"What's that there under the table?" until Pierrot calls,
"Cothurnus, come drag these bodies out of here!" they both stand
staring at the two bodies, without moving in any way, or even
lifting their eyes. (This same _holding_ of the play is used several
times also by the shepherds,--for instance, always during the
off-stage interpolations, they stand either staring at each other across
the wall, or maintaining whatever other position they may have had
when the off-stage voice begins speaking, until the interruption is
over, when they resume their drama quite as if nobody had spoken.)
Columbine's "How curious to strangle him like that" is spoken
extremely slowly, in a voice of awe, curiosity, and horror. For a
moment the two characters seem almost to feel and be subdued by the
tragedy that has taken place. They remain standing very quietly
while Cothurnus speaks his final lines off stage, and for a moment
after he has said, "The audience will forget"; then very slowly
raise their eyes and exchange glances, Pierrot nods his head curtly
and says, "That's so"; they set their bowls gaily back on the table,
and the play begins again.

Pierrot in such lines as "Ah, Columbine, as if it mattered!" speaks
with mock saccharine tenderness; but in such lines as "If you were a
fly you would be dead by now!" although he speaks very gaily his
malice must be apparent almost even to her; Columbine bores him to
death. When he says, "I'll go and strum the moon!" he is for the
instant genuinely excited and interested; he is for this moment like
a child, and is happy.

COLUMBINE: Pretty and charming, but stupid; she never knows what
Pierrot is talking about, and is so accustomed to him that she no
longer pretends to understand him; but she is very proud of him, and
when he speaks she listens with trustful admiration.  Her
expression, "I cannot live without" this or that, is a phrase she
uses in order to make herself more attractive, because she believes
men prefer women to be useless and extravagant; if left to herself
she would be a domestic and capable person.

COTHURNUS: This character should be played by a tall and imposing
figure with a tremendous voice.  The voice of Cothurnus is one of
the most important things in the acting play. He should have a voice
deeper than the voice used by any of the other persons, should speak
weightily and with great dignity, but almost without intonation, and
quite without feeling, as if he had said the same words many times
before.  Only in his last speech may he be permitted a comment on
the situation. This speech should be spoken quite as impressively as
the others and fully as slowly.

CORYDON and THYRSIS: These two characters are young, very simple,
and childlike; they are acted upon by the force that sits on the
back of the stage behind them. More and more as their quarrel
advances they begin to see that something is wrong, but they have no
idea what to do about it, and they scarcely realize what is
happening, the quarrel grows so from little things into big things.
Corydon's first vision of the tragedy is in "It's terrible when you
stop to think of it." Thyrsis' first vision comes when he looks into
the pool; in seeing the familiar reflection he is struck by the
unfamiliarity of one aspect of it, the poisonous root; for the first
time he realizes that this man who is about to kill with poisoned
water his most beloved friend, is none other than Thyrsis
_himself_,--"'Tis I!" The personalities of Thyrsis and Corydon are
not essentially different. They develop somewhat differently,
because of the differing circumstances.

When Columbine goes out for the first time she takes with her her
artichoke and her wine-glass, also a couple of macaroons, which she
nibbles, going out.  This helps to get the table cleared. The other
articles are removed by the shepherds when they prepare the stage
for their scene, in this manner: at the cue "Sir, we are always
ready. . . . Play the play!", Corydon and Thyrsis come down stage,
Corydon to Pierrot's end of the table, Thyrsis to Columbia's;
simultaneously, first, they set back the chairs against the wall,
Pierrot's left front, Columbine's right front; next they remove the
two big bowls and set them in symmetrical positions on the floor,
left front and right front, in such a way that the bowl of confetti
may be the mine of jewels for Corydon, and the bowl of fruits, the
punch-bowl, may represent the pool of water for Thyrsis; then,
taking the table by the two ends, they set it back against the wall,
right; next, while Corydon places the two pillows from the left wall
on the floor to represent rocks in their pasture, Thyrsis removes
from the table everything that is left on it except the
tablecloth,--this should be only Pierrot's wine-goblet and the flower
in its pot. (The flower is to represent later the poisonous weed
which Thyrsis finds, the wine-goblet a drinking-cup beside the pool,
the flower-pot a bowl in which to mix the poison and bring it to
Corydon.) The two shepherds do this setting of their stage swiftly
and silently, then seat themselves at once, in easy but beautiful
postures, and remain for a moment looking off as if at their sheep
while a complete silence settles over the stage and house,--a
_pastoral_ silence, if it is possible to suggest it--before they
begin to speak.

When Columbine comes in, looking for her hat, she picks up the hat
from her chair, now in the centre of the stage near the footlights,
in a direct line with Pierrot's, which is centre back, just in front
of Cothurnus,--the shepherds having set them in these positions, back
to back, in order to have their aid in weaving the wall. After
taking her hat, Columbine stands looking at the shepherds to see
what is going on.  They do not look at her. After a moment Thyrsis,
slowly, with his eyes steadfastly on Corydon's, says, "Take it, and
go." When Columbine comes in in the final scene, she is wearing the
hat. She takes it off, however, as she sits down again at the table,
so that the second beginning of the play may recall as vividly as
possible to the audience the first beginning.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Aria da Capo, by Edna St. Vincent Millay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARIA DA CAPO ***

***** This file should be named 5790.txt or 5790.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/9/5790/

Produced by David Starner

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
