Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, June 27, 1882, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Harper's Young People, June 27, 1882
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: November 26, 2018 [EBook #58357]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JUNE ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. III.--NO. 139. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, June 27, 1882. Copyright, 1882, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50 per
Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: UNROLLING THE SCHOONER'S SAILS.]

MR. STUBBS'S BROTHER.[1]

[1] Begun in No. 127, HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

BY JAMES OTIS.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE RESULTS OF LONG TRAINING.


Mr. Stubbs's brother had been a close observer of all that was going on,
with a view probably to guarding against another sudden fright such as
the overture had given him, and the moment Ben commenced to revolve, he
leaped from the tree, running with full speed toward the whirling
acrobat.

Toby started to catch him, but the monkey was too quick in his
movements. Before any one could prevent him, he had caught the revolving
boy by one leg, and for a few seconds it was difficult to tell which was
Ben and which the monkey.

Of course such an interruption as that broke up the performance for the
time being, and Toby was obliged to exert all his authority to
disentangle the monkey from the performer.

"I knew it wouldn't do to let him be loose," said Toby, in a
half-apologetic tone. "Now I'll set here, an' hold him while you
commence over again, Ben."

"Well, now, be sure you hold him," said Ben, seriously, "for I don't
want him to catch me again when I'm goin' 'round so fast, for it hurts a
fellow to tumble the way he made me."

Bob offered to help hold the unruly monkey, and when he and Toby had
taken a firm grip on the collar, the music was started again, and Ben
recommenced his performance.

This time he got through with it in a highly successful and creditable
manner; he proved to be a really good acrobat, so far as turning
hand-springs and standing on his head were concerned, and Toby felt
certain that this portion of the entertainment would be pleasing.

Bob now went into the ring, and began to sing the "Suwanee River" in a
manner which he intended should captivate his audience; but he had
neglected to give the band any orders, and the consequence was that when
he commenced to sing, Leander began to play "Old Dog Tray," which mixed
the musical matters considerably.

"You mustn't do that, Leander," Bob said, sharply, after he had done his
best to sing the band down, and failed in the attempt. "It won't do for
you to play one thing while I'm tryin' to sing something else. Now you
be restin' while I'm doin' my part."

Leander was so deeply interested in the enterprise that he was perfectly
willing to keep on playing without ever thinking of taking a rest; but
in deference to Bob's wishes he ceased his efforts, although he did
venture to remark that he noticed particularly, when the real circus was
there, that the band always played when the clown sang.

Bob got along very well with his portion of the rehearsal after the
first mistake had been rectified; and when he finished he bowed
gracefully in response to the applause bestowed upon him.

"Now's the time when you come in, Toby," said Bob; "an' if you'll see
how you can ride the ponies, Joe'll run around the ring with 'em."

Toby was willing to do his share of the work, and all the more so
because he could see that Abner, from his cozy seat under the bushes,
was deeply interested in all that was going on.

Joe got one of the ponies while Toby made his preparations; and after
the little horse had been led around the circle two or three times to
show what was expected of him, Toby got on his back. This was Reddy's
opportunity to act the part of ring-master, and he seized his long whip,
standing in the centre of the ring in what he believed to be the proper
attitude.

"Run around with him till I tell you to let go," said Toby, as he tied
the reins together to form a bridle, and then stood on the pony's back
as Mr. Castle had taught him to do.

There was so great a difference between the motion of this horse and
that of the one owned by Mr. Douglass that Toby began to understand it
might be quite as necessary to train the animal as its rider.

Owing to his lack of practice he was a little clumsy; but after one or
two attempts he went around the ring standing on one foot almost as well
as he had done it when with Ella.

The boys, who had never seen Toby ride before, were thoroughly elated by
the brief exhibition he gave them; and if he had done as they wanted, he
would have tired both himself and the pony completely.

"I'll practice some, now Abner can come out," said Toby, as he led his
steed to a spot where he could get more grass, but neglected to fasten
him; "an' I wouldn't wonder if I could ride two at once, after a little
while."

His partners in the enterprise were more than delighted with their
rider, and they already began to believe they should have such a circus
as would in some points eclipse the real one that had lately visited the
town.

After the excitement caused by Toby's riding had in a measure died away,
Ben continued with his feats according to the programme, and then Bob
commenced his second song.

The audience of partners were listening to it intently, the more because
it seemed to them that Bob had made a mistake as to the tune, and they
were anxious to see what he was going to do about it, when the pony Toby
had been riding suddenly dashed into the ring, with what looked very
like a boy on his back.

The partners were amazed at this interruption, and Bob continued to
sound the note he was wrestling with when he first saw the pony coming
toward him, until it ended almost in a shriek.

"Who is it?" cried Joe, as the pony dashed across the pasture, urged to
full speed by its rider, and in an instant more all saw a long curling
tail, which showed unmistakably who the culprit was.

"It's Mr. Stubbs's brother!" cried Toby, in alarm, "and how shall we
catch him?"

It was indeed the monkey, and during the next ten minutes it seemed to
the boys that they ran over every square foot of that pasture, scaring
the cows, and tiring themselves, until the frightened little horse was
penned up in one corner, and his disagreeable rider was taken from him.

This last act of the rehearsal had occupied so much time, and the monkey
was making himself so troublesome, that Toby decided to go home, the
others promising to come to Uncle Daniel's barn that afternoon, when
Reddy was to explain how the tent was to be procured--a matter which up
to this time he had kept a profound secret from all but Bob.

Short as the time spent at the rehearsal seemed to the boys, it was
considerably too long for one in Abner's weak condition, as was evident
from his face when Aunt Olive came to the door to help him out of the
carriage.

He seemed thoroughly exhausted, and as soon as he got into the house,
asked to be allowed to lie down--a confession of weakness that gave Aunt
Olive a great deal of uneasiness, because she considered herself in a
great measure responsible for the ride and its results, as she had urged
Abner to go before the doctor's advice had been heard in the matter.

Toby's fears regarding the invalid were always reflections of Aunt
Olive's; but when he saw Abner go to sleep so quickly, he thought she
was alarmed without cause, and believed his friend would be quite
himself as soon as he should awaken.

Dinner-time came and passed, and Abner was still sleeping sweetly.
Therefore Toby could see no reason why he should not join his partners,
whom he saw going into the barn before dinner was over.

"The boys have come up to see 'bout the tent," he said to Aunt Olive,
"an' I'm goin' out to the barn, where they're waitin' for me. Will you
call me when Abner wakes up?"

Aunt Olive promised that he should be informed as soon as the sick boy
could see him, and Toby joined his partners with never a fear but that
Abner would soon be able to participate in all his sports.

That the boys had come to Uncle Daniel's barn on very serious business
was evident from their faces, and the two large packages they brought.

Two rolls of what looked to be sail-cloth were lying on the barn floor,
and around them Bob, Reddy, Joe, Ben, and Leander were seated, with a
look on their faces that was very nearly a troubled one.

"What's them?" asked Toby, in surprise, as he pointed to the bundles.

"The tent," and Reddy gave a big sigh as he spoke.

"What, have you got two?" asked Toby, a look of glad surprise showing
itself on his face.

Reddy shook his head.

"What's the matter? If there ain't two tents here, what makes the two
bundles?" And Toby was almost impatient because he could not understand
the matter.

"Well, you see, this is just how it is," said Reddy, as he began to
untie the fastenings from the rolls of canvas. "When I told you I could
get a tent, I'd asked Captain Whetmore to lend me two of the sails what
he took off his schooner, an' he told me yes."

"An' you've got 'em, haven't you?" and Toby looked meaningly at the
canvas.

"Yes, we've got 'em," replied Joe; "but now we don't know how to fix
'em, 'cause you see we've got to put 'em up like a roof, an' we ain't
got anything for the ends."

Reddy had planned to use each of the sails as a side to the tent,
fastening them along the top to a ridge-pole; and it had never occurred
to him, in all the time he had had to think the matter over, that as yet
he had nothing with which to form the ends.

It was a question that puzzled the boys greatly, and caused their faces
to grow very long, until Toby said:

"I'll tell you how we can fix one end. We can put it right up against
the barn, where the little door is, an' then we can have the stalls for
a dressin'-room."

The faces of the partners lightened at once, and each wondered why he
had not thought of such a plan.

"An' I'll tell you how we could fix the other end," said Toby, quickly,
as another happy thought presented itself. "If Mr. Mansfield would lend
us his big flag, it would jest do it."

"That's the very thing, an' I'll go an' ask him now;" and Bob started
out of the barn at full speed, while Reddy, now that the important
question was settled, displayed great alacrity in unrolling his
treasures.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




MAX RANDER'S FENCING EXPERIENCE.

BY MATTHEW WHITE, JUN.


I don't know whether it was on account of the loss of the eggs or not,
but mother still continued in poor health, until at last the doctor
advised her to quit Paris and try country air for a week or two. So
father went with her to some place with a compound name, leaving Thad
and me at Mrs. Freemack's. But we hadn't been there long when he wrote
saying that they had decided to remain away a month at least, and asking
if I thought we could make the half-day's journey there by ourselves.

Feeling that I was indeed experienced above my years, I replied that of
course we could, and Mrs. Freemack having bought our tickets for us and
put us on the cars, we set out in high spirits, for that same kind lady
had just made each of us a present of a toy sword, with belt and
scabbard complete, and as the train moved off, leaving us with the
first-class compartment to ourselves, we foresaw a splendid opportunity
of practicing the manly art of fencing then and there.

I had lately been reading up on the subject, and had plied Mrs. Freemack
with so many questions about thrusts, foils, longeing and parrying, that
I do not wonder she had decided on swords as the most welcome parting
gifts she could bestow on us. But she hadn't given us any foils, so I
begged Thad to be careful to thrust only "in fun."

We waited until after the conductor had looked at our tickets from the
window; then I gave the word, whereupon we both whipped out our
glistening blades and flourished them about our heads.

"Now parry, Thad," I cried, as I brought my weapon down with a whiz; but
instead of parrying, he began laying about him like a pirate with his
cutlass. Of course I couldn't help laughing, although I had to jump
around pretty lively to protect myself.

However, I soon made him comprehend that he must obey the rules and
stand more on the defensive, and then we sat down to rest a minute
before making a fresh start.

"Now, ready again!" I exclaimed; and this time things went a little more
artistically, although the noise our blades made as they clashed
together reminded me strongly of father and the carving-knife just
before dinner at home.

Presently we both began to grow excited, and suddenly, to avoid one of
my thrusts, Thad jumped up on the seat behind him. Quick as thought I
sprang up on the other, and then we fought in gallant style across the
chasm, which to our vivid imaginations ran red with blood or white with
foaming floods. We quite forgot where we were, and shouted and danced
about like a couple of Zulus.

On a sudden, ker-chink went my sword right through a little piece of
looking-glass, shaped like a triangle, and set in the cushions just
behind Thad.

"Now you've done it!" he cried, jumping to the floor to escape the
falling fragments.

"Oh, pshaw!" I returned, "it won't take much to pay for that. I don't
see what use such a little bit of a mirror is, anyway. But, hello! what
are we stopping here for, I wonder?" for the train was gradually slowing
down, and finally came to a stand-still in the open country.

Meanwhile, I began calculating how much such a piece of glass as I had
broken ought to cost, and had just decided on two francs (forty cents),
when the guard appeared at the window again, looked in, then pulled open
the door with a jerk, sprang into the compartment, and pointing to the
broken glass with one hand, seized me with the other, and then--but of
course that was all I could understand.

However, I wasn't a bit frightened, although I wondered how he had found
out about it so soon. Simply putting my hand in my pocket, I pulled out
two francs and offered them to him. But instead of taking them with a
polite "merci," as I had expected, he swept them to the floor; then
lifting me in no very gentle fashion on to the seat, he planted me
squarely in front of a small placard fastened just below where the
mirror had been, and which I had never taken the trouble to read before,
supposing it to be all in French. It was printed in French, German, and
English, and announced that if, in a case of necessity, the presence of
the guard was required, the glass was to be broken and a cord pulled
inside. Should this be done, however, it went on to state, without good
and sufficient reason, a fine would be imposed, the amount of which far
exceeded the sum of money I had with me.

I understood it all now; my sword had not only broken the glass, but
caught in the ring attached to the alarm-rope, thus causing the stoppage
of the whole train, and my present predicament.

What was to be done? I was not able to pay out that which I did not
possess, explain matters I could not, and meantime the conductor
continued to storm and rage, curious passengers began to gather about
the open door, and Thad grew pale with fright.

Suddenly I thought of a possible way out of the scrape, and heroically
determined to make the necessary sacrifice. Drawing forth my precious
watch, I handed it to the guard.

He smiled and nodded as he took it, and the next moment the train
started on again. But there was no more fencing for us that day, and I
sat gazing drearily out of the window, in grief for my lost time-piece,
nearly all the rest of the journey.

Father said afterward that it served me right, and would teach me there
was a place for everything; but before we left France he redeemed my
watch for me.




[Illustration: THE FIRST MUSIC LESSON.]




A LITTLE DUKE.

BY ELIZABETH ABERCROMBIE.


In the beautiful old Abbey of Westminster, London, among the tombs of
illustrious men and women is a tablet inscribed to "William, Duke of
Gloucester, the last surviving son of Queen Anne, together with
seventeen of her other infant children."

This little boy was born in 1689, and great were the rejoicings thereat.
His sponsors were King William and Queen Mary themselves; for having no
children of their own, this royal couple looked upon this baby nephew as
the future heir of all their greatness.

It is no slight thing, however, to be born a royal Prince, and this poor
child, owing to ill health, had but a sorry time of it from the first.
When he was five years old he was still supporting himself as he went up
and down stairs by holding on to people's hands. This his father, burly
Prince George of Denmark, declared was a shame and disgrace for any heir
of England. Accordingly his mother, who had a tender heart, with a sigh,
took her boy apart and tried to reason him out of what was thought to be
only a stupid habit; but as this did no good, she put a birch rod into
her husband's hand, and he whipped his son till the little fellow from
sheer pain was forced into running alone. After that he never asked any
help when walking, but it seemed, if possible, as though he was oftener
ill than ever.

So little was understood about disease in those early days that
sometimes odd reasons were assigned for these attacks of the Prince. It
had long been the custom of the English court to wear leeks on St.
David's Day, out of compliment to the Welsh. One of silk and silver had
been given Gloucester for his hat one year, but not satisfied, he
insisted on seeing the real thing.

Now his tutor's name was Lewis Jenkins, and as he was a Welshman, Lewis
was only too happy at the thought of showing off the famous plant of his
country to his royal charge. A bunch of the harmless leeks was at once
procured, with which Gloucester amused himself for some time, tying them
round the masts of a certain toy ship by which he and his boys were
taught something of the great British fleet. But suddenly he threw
himself down, and went to sleep.

When he awoke he was terribly ill, and it was many days before he could
leave his bed. There was a great outcry in the palace, and you may think
how poor Lewis Jenkins quaked in his shoes, for they said this illness
was all the fault of the leeks!

Even while Gloucester was in bed, his father's system of education was
being carried on, and the plays devised by his attendants were intended
to be instructive as well as amusing.

Ever since he could walk the Duke had been the leader of a little
company of boy soldiers. These were posted as sentinels at his door,
tattoos were beat on the drum, while toy fortifications were built by
his bed, and once there had nearly taken place a _bona-fide_ fight over
the little prostrate body, not laid down; I fancy, in Prince George's
rule.

Mrs. Buss, the nurse, was the cause of the quarrel. Wishing to amuse the
invalid, she sent by an unlucky Mr. Wetherby an automaton representing
Prince Louis of Baden fighting the Turks. "As the young Duke had given
up toys since the preceding summer, his masculine attendants started the
idea that the present was a great affront, and it was forthwith
sentenced to be torn in pieces--an execution which was instantly
performed by the Duke's small soldiers." Still not satisfied, however,
they next declared that Mr. Wetherby himself ought to be punished for
daring to bring such a thing as a _doll_ to the heir of England.

Wetherby, getting an inkling of how matters stood, ran away, but only to
be discovered, captured, and brought into the Duke's presence, who
gravely pronounced his sentence. The unhappy man was then bound hand and
foot, mounted on a wooden horse, and soused all over with water from
enormous syringes and squirts. When nearly half drowned, he was again
drawn on his horse into the royal bedroom, and I am sorry to find it on
record that the young tyrant enjoyed the sight of the man's sorrowful
condition immensely.

Still this little boy often showed great kindness of heart. Like most
mothers the Princess Anne was anxious that her son should use no vulgar
expressions in conversation. She was much shocked one day to hear him
say he was "confounded dry."

"Who taught you those words?" she asked.

"If I say Dick Drury, he will be sent down-stairs," the child whispered
to one of the court ladies standing by, then added aloud, "I invented
them myself, mamma."

And so Dick Drury was saved from punishment for once in his life, if no
more.

"Papa, I wish you and mamma unity, peace, and concord, not for a time,
but forever," was Gloucester's grave address to his father and mother
when celebrating one of the anniversaries of their wedding day.

"You made a fine compliment to their Royal Highnesses to-day, sir," said
Lewis Jenkins, afterward.

"Lewis," earnestly returned the boy, "it was no compliment--it was
_sincere_."

After the death of Queen Mary, King William on one occasion paid a state
visit to his little namesake, and was much gratified at being received
by the child under arms, with all the military honors which a great
field-marshal would pay to his sovereign.

"Have you any horses yet?" asked the King, by way of opening
conversation.

"Yes," was the answer, "I have one live one and two dead ones."

"But soldiers always bury their dead horses out of their sight," said
his Majesty, laughing. That laugh could not be forgotten. The moment his
visitor had gone, the boy insisted on burying his two _dead_ horses
(which, of course, were animals of wood) deep down in the ground. This
was done amidst much pomp and ceremony, after which Gloucester wrote an
epitaph upon his two poor lamented wooden beasts.

Young as he was, this little Duke seems to have known the value of
loyalty and truth. Once when a plot was discovered against the King, and
it was hard to tell who might not be a traitor at heart, Gloucester sent
an address to his uncle which he made every member of his boy regiment
and of his household also sign.

"_We your Majesty's subjects will stand by you while we have a drop of
blood_," ran this loyal address, upon reading which I doubt not King
William ever after felt perfectly secure and at ease.

A great many stories are told of the battles, sieges, and adventures of
the Duke and his boys, and the palace must have rung with their shouts.
Still there was plenty of hard work as well as play.

When Gloucester was seven years old, his tutor, whom he loved, Lewis
Jenkins, to the great grief of both, was dismissed, and he was placed
under the charge of a bishop. Four times a year, too, a strict
examination was held by four learned lords of the realm to make sure
Bishop Burnet was making his pupil as wise as they thought the future
King of England ought to be. Poor child! his answers on jurisprudence,
the Gothic laws, and the feudal system were marvels, we are assured, but
for all his study, I am afraid he knew really very little about those
abstruse subjects, while it is saddening to read how all his happy
sprightliness faded away under this severe course.

While visiting one of the great college libraries in Oxford, I was much
pleased to discover the quaint and most deliriously funny little
composition given below. It had grown yellow with age, lying for so many
years stored away in its glass case, together with many other
interesting hits of penmanship.

The writing, I am bound to confess, was beautifully clear and good. The
composition was given both in Latin and English, while the corrections
by Bishop Burnet could plainly be seen in the margin:

"COMPOSITION OF WILLIAM, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.

     "A Tyrant is a savage hideous beast. Imagine that you saw a certain
     monster armed on all sides with 500 horns on all sides dreadfull
     fatned with humane intrails drunken with humane blood this is the
     fatal mischiefe whom they call a Tyrant.

  "WILLIAM.
  "_June_ 13, 1700."

The pen of this little scholar was soon after laid aside forever. After
a short illness of five days, he died, July 30, 1700.




OLD LIGHT'S JOKE.


"I say, have your folks got a horse?"

"Yes, we have, and I'm a-going to lead him down to water by-and-by."

"Is it your own horse?"

"Yes, he is. We've had him ever so long. His name's Lightning. What's
your name?"

"Johnny Craddock; and I heard your mother call you Peter, when she said
what she'd do if you went away from the gate before dinner was ready."

"That's only because we've just come. She won't be afraid about me after
I get used to it."

"There's lots of nice boys around here. Me and Joe Somers and Put Medill
and a whole crowd. Some of us have got horses. We've got four, but they
belong to old Squire Potter, and he keeps 'em. Some day you may go with
me and see 'em."

A clear ringing voice sounded across the village street just then:
"Johnny!--Johnny Craddock!"

"Guess your mother wants you. It's dinner-time."

Johnny knew it, but he left a promise behind him, as he darted away,
that he would come back after dinner and see Pete Burrows ride Lightning
down to the river to water. The arrival of a new boy was a great event
in Ridgeville, and his new neighbors were as eager to make his
acquaintance as they had been shy about coming too near the house while
the furniture was unloading and being carried in.

Johnny Craddock and two others were pretending to play jackstones in the
grass near the big gate when Pete Burrows at last came out through the
lane from the barn, with Lightning, at the end of a halter, behind him.

"Ain't he a big one?"

"He's blind of one eye."

"Can he go?"

"He's the biggest kind of a hoss," remarked Pete, proudly, "and when
he's brushed up he's pretty nigh red."

"Did you ever ride him?" asked Put Medill, doubtfully.

"Ride him? I'll show you."

He led his big, raw-boned, one-eyed sorrel wonder right alongside of the
fence, and in another moment he was mounted.

"There! He's as gentle as--"

"I say, will he carry double?"

"Of course he will. I've seen him carry three, and he didn't care any
more what they weighed--"

That was almost enough, and boy after boy gathered courage to follow
Johnny Craddock, for Lightning really seemed to take no notice whatever
of his increasing burden. He shook his ears a little when Joe Somers dug
his bare heels into him, and then he walked calmly away from the fence.
He could see the wide, shallow river spreading out above the bridge, and
knew very well what was expected of him.

The four boys clung tight to each other at first, for they were on a
very high horse as well as a strange one, but before they reached the
bridge they had gathered courage enough to "hurrah" two at a time, and
to answer questions other fellows asked them from the sidewalk.

"Stop him, won't you?" shouted Put Medill, as Lightning's big feet began
to splash in the water. "I want to get down."

Pete might have tried, if the halter had been in his hand, but the
lowering of the great heavy sorrel head toward the cool surface below
had jerked the strap from his grasp, and Lightning was a free horse. He
was free, and he had at once determined not to do his after-dinner
drinking just there at the river's edge. There was more and deeper water
further on, and it might be better.

Four half-grown boys will fill up the back of any one horse pretty well,
however large he may be, and there was not room for any more. When his
head was down, there did not seem to be quite enough, and a good push
would have sent Pete Burrows down the animal's neck; that is, if the two
handfulls of sorrel mane he was grasping should come out.

There were boys on the bridge now, and others along-shore, and they were
all making remarks, and more were coming, besides three men, and old
Grandmother Medill, and Mrs. Craddock, and all three of Joe Somers's
aunts, who lived with his mother, and kept the milliner shop.

[Illustration: "LIGHTNING WALKED STRAIGHT AHEAD."]

Lightning walked straight ahead until the water arose above his knees.
Horses were driven through the river right there every day, and he knew
there was no danger of his getting drowned; but it was a green-head fly
that stung him and made him shiver. It seemed to the boys they were
going to be shivered off into the water, and they all dug their heels in
hard and shouted, not very loud, "Hold on!"

That was pretty nearly in the middle, and Lightning had taken three long
drinks and a short one, but his halter was as far out of reach as ever.

"He'll go across," said Joe Somers, "and we can get off."

"Perhaps he'll turn back," said Put Medill; but Pete Burrows knew
better, for he could see which way Lightning turned his head.

"He's going up stream. Oh dear!"

That was precisely what he began to do, and before he had gone a rod he
stumbled dreadfully over a stone on the bottom, and the boys on the
bridge gave a shout, and Johnny Craddock could hear his mother calling
him to "come right back this minute."

Grandmother Medill said something too, and so did Joe Somers's three
aunts; but old Lightning had only just settled in Ridgeville, and was
not acquainted with either of them. He stumbled right along into still
deeper water, and his four riders clung to him and to each other
desperately.

"There's the island!" gasped Johnny Craddock. "It's awful deep and swift
both sides of that."

A long, low, bushy affair was the island, and the water poured all over
it in flood times; but it was dry now, and the grass had a fresh, green,
inviting look to the eyes of Lightning. He had been drinking, and he
would now eat. He made straight for the island, and his load held on
until he got there.

They did not utter a sound while he was pulling his feet out of the mud
at the shore, but the moment he was high and dry among the grass and
bushes, boy after boy came sliding down, until Lightning's long back was
bare again.

"Here we are! Hurrah!"

Three of those boys had been born and brought up in Ridgeville, but not
one of them had ever before been to that island on horseback.

There was something almost grand about it until Mrs. Craddock and the
rest gathered on the river-bank, within very easy speaking distance, and
began to tell what they thought of the performance. There were at least
six distinct voices telling Peter Burrows to catch his horse, and bring
to the shore the three poor fellows upon whom he had played that wicked
trick.

Poor Pete! Just at that moment old Lightning had discovered that all the
grass on the island was coarse, hard, speary bunch-grass and
swamp-grass, unfit for a horse like himself. He turned willingly away
from it, and before a grasp could be made at his halter, he was pulling
his feet out of the shore mud again, as he waded away from the island
into the river.

He walked about half-way across, and then stood still, in pretty deep
water. He looked at the island and the boys, and then he looked at the
bank and the young and old ladies, and he put out his long neck, with a
loud whinny.

"Hear him!" exclaimed Pete. "That's his way of laughing. It's an awful
joke on us. Can we ever get ashore?"

"Get ashore?" said Johnny Craddock, looking very miserable. "My mother's
going for Jones's boat now. She'll be here less 'n no time."

Old Lightning stumbled on, over the stones and through the water, and he
reached the bank just in time for Mrs. Burrows to take him by the
halter. She did not lead him away at once, for she wanted to see if
there would be any room in Mr. Jones's boat for the boys. It looked as
if there would not, for all the women were in it, and so was little Vic
Doubleday, shoving from the stern with a pole. One old horse had carried
the boys to the island, but it took a boat and a mother and a
grandmother and three aunts and a second cousin to bring them away from
it.

When Pete Burrows came at last, and his mother gave him the end of the
halter, she said to him:

"Pete, did you let any of those Ridgeville boys know how scared you
was?"

"No, ma'am, I wasn't scared."

"That's right, Pete. I wasn't, either, and all those women were. I'll
settle with you when we get to the house. Go right along now. Not one of
'em shall say a word to you. Put Lightning in the stable, and come to
me."




CAPTAIN ORTIS[2]

[2] Motley's _History of the United Netherlands_.

BY MARY A. BARR.


  Rich was the city of Antwerp, richer than can be told--
  Full of precious things from the East; full of silver and gold;
  Full of merchants like princes, and of burghers bold and free,
  Ready to fight for their faith and rights, proud of their liberty.

  Alva took it for Philip of Spain with a wild fanatic band--
  Hungry, desperate, cruel men, each fighting for his own hand;
  For Alva had vowed, when Antwerp fell, each captain in his host
  Should have for plunder whatever thing he thought would please him most.

  Antwerp went down in fire and blood. Each captain, as he pleased,
  Palace, or guild, or store, or gold for his own profit seized.
  Then Captain Caspar Ortis spoke, "Duke Alva, for my share
  I choose the city prison, and for nothing else I care."

  The prison was full of patriots, of felons of every kind,
  Of wealthy burgomasters who had dared to speak their mind,
  Of heretics to Rome's high Church; and monks and priests cried out,
  "These prisoners are the Pope's and King's: take care what you're
      about."

  But Alva coldly made reply: "Ortis shall have his way;
  He is my soldier, and his sword good work has done to-day.
  Antwerp is mine; and what care I for Pope, or King, or Cortes?
  I keep my word--the city prison belongs to Captain Ortis.

  "If 'tis his whim these heretics to burn, that is his right;
  You would have done the same, I know. Go quickly from my sight."
  Then Ortis flung the prison gates as wide as they could be;
  "Jailer," he said, "loose every bond, and set the prisoners free."

  Then forth from rack and torture rooms, from darkness and from pain,
  They trooped into the prison-yard--they saw the light again--
  Women and children, rich and poor, young men and burghers old.
  Said Ortis, "Who for liberty can measure me their gold?"

  The wealthy gave him there their bond; they gave it cheerfully.
  Unto the poor he only said, "Go forth; you too are free."
  The women wept about his knees, the pale sick children feared,
  And Ortis grimly smiled on them, and chewed his long black beard.

  But not in all of Alva's host was captain, young or old,
  Who for his share of plunder won such honor and such gold.
  The ransom fees rolled up and up--he scarce their sum could count--
  And not one thaler was grudged gold, whatever the amount.

  Perhaps you think a hero should have set his prisoners free
  Without a claim of any kind, without a ransom fee;
  But good is good, however small; and in those wild dark days
  His deed was thought most merciful, and worthy of all praise.

  And, it is said, in after-years, when all his gold was spent,
  He was with Antwerp's booty roll above all else content,
  And that when old and weak he kept one single memory--
  "Jailer, bring forth your prisoners, and let the poor go free."




PERIL AND PRIVATION.

BY JAMES PAYN.

WAGER ISLAND.

Part I.


In 1740 the English fitted out a fleet against the Spaniards, among
which was the _Wager_, an old East India-man that had been transformed
into a man-of-war.

In those days there were no iron-plated vessels, and the main difference
between traders and ships of war lay in their guns. But the _Wager_ was
not a good ship, to begin with, and was now laden and encumbered with
every description of military stores. Moreover, her crew consisted
chiefly of "pressed men"--men who, having just returned from long
voyages on their own account, had been seized, perhaps just as they
reached their native land, and made men-of-war's men against their will,
as was then the custom.

In England and America we should think the system employed by other
nations of compelling men to become soldiers, their lot being decided by
a number drawn from an urn, most intolerable; but the old system of
"pressing" for the navy was far worse. Going to sea was not then looked
upon as now as an honorable profession, with its compensations and
pleasures, and not more difficult and dangerous than many another way in
which the poor man has to earn his living. A sea-faring life, owing to
the miserable equipment of the ships and the insolence and brutality of
the officers, was considered by many a lot to which death was almost
preferable. To obtain sailors for merchant vessels was so difficult that
gangs of men were sent out who would overpower and seize any able-bodied
man they might find in the streets, carrying him aboard a vessel at
night, and keeping him in confinement until away from land, when he
would be released and compelled to do his share in managing the vessel.
Any attempt at remonstrance would be promptly quelled by blows and
injuries of a fouler character.

It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that among the crew of the
_Wager_, made up as it was in this way, a spirit of insubordination and
a hatred of authority existed. This will explain many things that
happened on this unhappy voyage that would otherwise be hard to believe.

The vessel had always difficulty in keeping up with the rest of the
squadron; and meeting with a gale on the 7th of April, was so greatly
shattered and disabled that she lost sight of her sister ships
altogether, and could obtain no help from them. The place of rendezvous
was the island of Socoro; but the weather was too bad to take an
observation, as it is called, whereby to judge of her position. There
were no charts on board of the neighborhood whither she had been driven,
but an "abundance of weeds and the flight of certain birds" indicated
her approach toward land of some sort.

The gale by this time had reduced the vessel to a mere wreck, and every
endeavor was made to keep her from going ashore. It was difficult enough
to set the top-sails, since "it was so extremely dark that the people
could not see the length of the ship, and no sooner had it been
accomplished than the wind blew them from the yards."

At four in the morning of the 14th, though she had her head to the west,
and was therefore standing off shore, the _Wager_ struck violently on a
hidden rock. It helps us to picture the force of waves in storm to learn
that the people on board at first took this concussion for the mere
striking of a heavy sea. But the next minute the ship was laid on her
beam ends, and the sea made a fair breach in her.

The consequence of this was an almost universal panic. Those who were
not drowned in their berths rushed up on deck, and many appeared
deprived of reason. One man, armed with a cutlass, struck at every one
about him, and had to be knocked overboard, and another, "though one of
the bravest men on board," was so dismayed by the terrible aspect of the
breakers that he tried to throw himself over the rails of the
quarter-deck. Others abandoned themselves to sullen despair, and were
carried to and fro, with every shock of the ship, like inanimate logs.

The man at the wheel, however, kept his station, though both rudder and
tiller were gone, and Mr. Jones, the mate, cried out, in order to
encourage the crew: "What, my men, did you never see a ship among
breakers before? Come, lend a hand; here's a sheet, and here's a brace;
lay hold. We shall bring her near enough land yet to save our lives."
This was the more creditable in him, as he knew what "breakers" were,
and had a firm conviction in his own mind, as he afterward confessed,
that nothing short of a miracle could save them.

But the ship drove on, and contrived to strike just between two large
rocks. One of them partially sheltered her from the beating of the sea,
which nevertheless threatened every minute to rend her to pieces.

As soon as day dawned, the barge, the cutter, and the yawl were
launched, though with the greatest difficulty, and so "many leaped into
the first that she was greatly overloaded." The bonds of discipline, it
will thus be seen, were already relaxed; nor must the saying of the
Captain, that "he would be the last man to leave the ship," be set down
as very heroic, for Captain Cheap had recently dislocated his shoulder,
and would have found getting into a boat a very difficult job indeed. Of
all those in authority with whom we have to deal in these scenes of
peril and privation, Captain Cheap, of the _Wager_, was, I think, the
most selfish and incompetent. At the same time, as will be seen in the
sequel, he had plenty of courage. Even on the present occasion, as
Midshipman Byron witnesses, the Captain issued his orders "with as much
calmness as ever he had done during the former part of the voyage."

But only a very few obeyed him. Many of those who had not gone in the
boats "broke open every box and chest they could reach, stove in the
heads of the casks of wine and brandy," and got so helplessly
intoxicated that "they were drowned on board, and lay floating about the
decks for days afterward."

Those who had reached land in the boats, the number amounting in all to
no less than 140 persons, had but little to congratulate themselves
upon. Whichever way they looked, horror and desolation presented
themselves: on one side the wreck, containing all they had to subsist
upon; on the other, bleak and barren rocks. They found, however, a
deserted Indian hut, into which they crowded for shelter from the storm
which still raged.

In the morning the pangs of hunger seized them. Most of them had fasted
for forty-eight hours, yet only three pounds of biscuit dust had been
brought ashore with them, while all the land afforded had been a single
sea-gull and a handful of wild celery. These they made into a kind of
soup, which, little as it was among so many, caused the most violent
sickness and swooning. The biscuit dust had been put into a tobacco bag
which had not been entirely cleaned out, and thus the whole party was
very nearly poisoned to death.

The Captain and officers had now come on shore, but many of the crew had
refused to do so. The storm continuing worse than ever, however, they
got frightened, and since the boats could not be got out to them
immediately "they fired one of the quarter-deck guns at the hut" as a
gentle reminder.

The men on land occupied a rocky promontory so exceedingly steep that
they were obliged to cut steps to ascend and descend it, which they
called--not inaptly--Mount Misery. The knowledge that their comrades
were in a state of open mutiny did not tend to raise their spirits. They
would have been willing enough, perhaps, to leave them to their fate,
but for the necessity of getting provisions.

[Illustration: WITH ONE BLOW CAPTAIN CHEAP FELLED HIM TO THE GROUND.]

When at last they were brought to land, they presented an extraordinary
appearance. They were armed to the teeth, and only by the resolution of
the officers, who "held loaded pistols to their breasts," could they be
induced to give up their weapons. They had rifled the chests in the
cabins, and put the laced clothes they found in them over their own
greasy raiment, and the boatswain, their ring-leader, was rigged out in
the most splendid attire. One is glad to read that, without respect to
the figure he made, Captain Cheap felled him to the ground with his
cane, and for a few hours order was restored.

As the hut could only hold a few people, the cutter was turned keel
upward, and fixed on props, which made a very tolerable habitation. But
food was still so scarce, though the scanty provisions from the ship had
been hoarded with great frugality, that the men were glad to eat the
carrion crows that preyed on the corpses from the wreck, which every
tide cast on shore.

The ship was now under water, except the quarter-deck and part of the
forecastle, and all that was procurable from it had to be drawn up by
large hooks--"an occupation much obstructed by the bodies floating
between-decks."

It was not until the 25th of May (eleven days after the shipwreck) that
provisions began to be regularly issued from the store tent, which was
guarded by the officers night and day. On the 28th, three canoes with
Indians came alongside the wreck, and from them they purchased "a dog or
two and some very fine mussels."

The language of these men was utterly unintelligible: their clothing was
composed of skins and feathers, and they had evidently never seen a
white man before. But the castaways contrived to ascertain from them
that they were on some island on the coast of Patagonia, about three
hundred miles north of the Straits of Magellan.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration]

THESE MY LITTLE ONES.

BY MONA NOEL PATON.

II.


When young Master Dreamer came out of the store, three radiant faces
almost paid him for his self-denial.

"Oh, Nellie!" whispered Bill, trembling with delight.

"God bless him!" said Nellie.

"What shall we buy?" said Bill. "This will buy heaps."

"Billy," said Nell, "don't let us buy candies. They would soon be gone.
Let us buy something to amuse Bab when we are away at school."

Poor Billy sighed. It was hard to leave the tempting window. But he was
not selfish.

"Shall we buy a dog?" said he.

"No. Mother says they eat too much. Besides, it would run away."

"Rabbits?"

"No; we could not keep them in the room. What do you say to a bird?"

"The very thing!" cried Bill. "Let's go to the bird man's, and see what
we can get."

Off they started, Bab trotting along bravely.

An hour later, as night was falling, up the dark stair of Nellie's home
came three pairs of eager feet. Mother came to the door to meet the
children.

"How late you are, dears!" she said. "I was beginning to be anxious
about you."

"Mother! mother!--look! look!" was all the answer she received; and a
poor rumpled pigeon was pressed so close to her face that she could
hardly see it.

And then the tired mother heard the story of the wonderful
afternoon--how kind the little gentleman had been, how grim and cross
the bird man, at first ordering them away without listening to them,
then refusing to sell them anything for a shilling, and finally giving
them this darling pigeon that he thought was going to die, and giving
them back their shilling too. There it was, smooth and shining, and
Nellie held it out for mother to see.

Before one of the little ones would taste a bite of food, the pigeon had
to be fed and warmed. A basket was filled with soft rags, and set near
the fire, and in it the sick bird was placed. Then it was fed with
delightful bread and milk, each child sparing a part of its own supper.
Its bright eyes watched the children go to bed, and before they went
there was a prayer softly breathed, in which the little gentleman was
not forgotten, nor yet the rough bird man.

Long before it wanted to be, the next morning, the pigeon was awakened
by tender caresses, and fed before they so much as looked at their own
breakfast. Certainly it looked better. The shilling was put carefully
away to buy its food. When Nellie and Bill, after a last loving glance,
had gone to school, Bab sat down by it on the hearth.

"Oh, pigeon, pigeon," she whispered, "do live! I love you so! I do love
you so! Oh, pigeon, live!"

The pigeon did live. It was drooping for just what the children gave
it--a little love. Day by day it grew bigger and stronger. Soon it would
hop all over the room, perch on Bab's head, and eat its dinner from her
plate. When spring came, and the days grew warm, the window was always
left open, only a little bit, lest Bab should fall out, but still enough
to let the pigeon hop in and out at its own sweet will.

When summer came, though it was much nicer than winter, the close air of
the court made poor Bab feel quite ill in the hot mornings. In the
afternoons her brother and sister would take her far away on a long walk
to the sweet grassy meadows outside the old city walls. They had found
out now where their "little gentry" lived; and the great pleasure of the
day was in returning from the meadow, and peeping in at the beautiful
garden where the two happy children seemed to spend their whole time in
play.

The grass in this garden was often quite white with daisies, and the
poor children used to stretch through and try to gather a few, but they
were almost always just out of their reach.

One very hot afternoon they were coming home through the square rather
tired. There seemed to be something wrong with Bab. She was cross and
languid. She cried when Nellie's hand could not reach the daisies.

"Hush, hush, dear; the little master will hear you," whispered Nellie,
while Bill stretched in his arm, and succeeded at last in getting one of
the coveted flowers. The little master had heard and seen. He came up to
them, and asked, shyly,

"Do you want some daisies?"

"If you please, sir," said Bill and Nellie, in a breath.

In a moment the little fellow was down on his knees among the daisies
gathering busily.

"I would 'ike to gaver some myse'f," said Bab to Nellie.

The little boy looked up and paused. His companions were at play not far
distant. He looked half afraid.

"Nellie, me s'ould 'ike to gaver some myse'f," whimpered the tiny voice.

He hesitated no longer, but sprang up. "Come to the gate, and I'll let
you in," he said, in a low voice; and then added, "but you must go out
again as soon as she has got some."

The next minute Bab was down in the soft, sweet grass, gathering the
daisies with both little hands.

"Master Dreamer" did not seem very comfortable, however, and watched his
play-fellows cautiously. All at once two of them stopped their game, and
came running up.

"Go out! go out!" cried Dreamer, eagerly, "or they'll hurt you."

But already the rude boys were upon them.

"Turn them out! turn them out!" they shouted, and one of them caught
Bill by the shoulder, while the others began roughly to hustle Nellie
and poor, wondering Bab. This our little gentleman could not stand.
Wildly he hit out right and left, keeping between Nellie with Bab in her
arms and her two cowardly assailants, until they and Bill were safe
outside the gate. Then he shut it, and stood with his back against it.

The other boys were very indignant, and many a buffet poor Dreamer got.

The last the three children saw of him, as they turned out of the
square, he was lying on the grass, crying bitterly, his little sister
standing beside him, crying too.

"You baby!" sneered one of the boys, "blubbering because you got hit!"

"I'm not crying because I got hit," shouted Dreamer, springing up, his
face all burning. "I'm crying to think that boys calling themselves
gentlemen should have behaved in such a way to those poor children."

"Cads have no right in the garden."

"Then the sooner you get out the better," retorted the little champion,
for which observation the enemy was upon him again.

Poor Bill and his sisters felt very sorrowful at the trouble they had
brought their dear little friend into.

"Oh, mother!" they cried; "to think it was all for us!"

"Depend upon it, my darlings," said the wise mother, "that is his
greatest comfort. He is all the happier for it now."

Something was very wrong indeed with little Bab next morning. When her
mother bent over her to give her the parting kiss, she opened her eyes,
stared wildly upward, and uttered a scream of terror.

"Go away! go away! You hit the little boy!"

Poor little Bab was very ill. Fever had broken out in the close court.
Her mother sent Bill for the dispensary doctor, and Nellie to tell her
employers that she could not work for them that day. When the doctor
came, he confirmed her fears. Bab had the fever. Oh, the agony of the
next few days! The once merry voice rang out full of trouble. Constantly
one weary cry came from the dark, cracked lips:

"Why won't you let Bab in to gaver f'owers? Why are the great gates
always shut? My daisies! my daisies!"

"Nellie," said Bill, one evening, "wouldn't it make Bab better if we
should go to the square and ask him and the little lady to gather some
daisies, and kiss them, and give them to us for Bab?"

Nellie thought it would. Early the next morning, which was Saturday,
they set off without saying a word to their mother. They were so early
that they had to wait a long time in the square before the boy appeared.
At last the door of the house flew open, a hoop came bounding down the
steps, and after it shot a boy, the baby behind him, in a new dress,
with a doll clasped in her arms.

It was the baby who first noticed the waiting children.

"Dere's de children we gived de daisies to," she said, going up to the
railing. "Does you want some flowers, now?" she asked, throwing down her
doll and dropping on her knees to pick them.

"Where's de baby?" she demanded presently, pausing in her diligent
task.

"She's very ill. That's why we came for flowers," said Nellie, sadly.

"Has her a sore froat?"

"No, it's the fever."

"Brozer, brozer, come quick and gazzer flowers. De ittle baby has dot de
fever!"

Brozer came.

"Is she very ill?" he asked.

"Yes," said poor Bill, "she's near dead, and we thought perhaps if you
would gather some flowers and kiss them, and wish Bab better, perhaps
she would get better. For she does love you so!"

Suddenly Baby dropped the daisies on the grass, clasped her hands, and
said, in a loud clear voice,

"O Dod! dear Dod! make Bab better, p'ease." And then with a satisfied
nod, as if to say. "That's settled," she set to work again.

Dreamer gathered busily, and said never a word.

"Will that be enough?" he inquired, after a while, holding out a great
ball of white stars.

"Oh, quite, quite. Now would you mind kissing it?" said Nell, eagerly.

"That will do no good."

"Oh yes, it will!" Nellie insisted, and so, blushing scarlet, he kissed
the flowers, saying gravely, "May she soon be better!"

Baby did the same, crowding into Bill's hand the daisy heads she had
plucked. Then, before he knew what she was about, she thrust her sunny
face through the bars and kissed him on the lips.

"Take 'at to de baby," was all she had time to say, when her brother
caught her in his arms and drew her back.

"Oh, Baby! Baby! you silly, silly girl," he cried. "You may have caught
the fever," he exclaimed, his eyes full of fear. And then, moved by a
strange wild hope that he might be able to take the infection from her,
he kissed her slowly.

"Please, sir," said Nellie, "the doctor says it isn't infectious."

His face cleared.

"Thank you," he said. "Come again when little Bab is better." And so
they parted.

When again they crept softly up the rickety stair, their sister lay upon
the bed, her tiny hands folded, her eyes closed, her lips parted in a
smile. By her side sat the worn-out mother, her head on Bab's pillow.
Both were fast asleep.

They laid the flowers on the bed, and very gently Bill just touched
Bab's face and gave her the baby's kiss.

They seated themselves on the window-sill beside the pigeon, which had
been a little bit neglected in their anxiety, and waited a long, long
time. An hour must have passed, and Nellie was the only watcher, for
Bill too fell asleep. At last Bab stirred a little. Slowly her wee hands
moved until they touched the daisies.

"Who sent 'em?" she whispered.

"The little master," said Nellie, "and the baby, and they asked God to
let you stay and get well, and He said yes."

"'Es," said Bab, "Dod said 'es."

From that hour she began to grow stronger. Every day Nellie and Bill
went to the garden again, and Dreamer and his sister gathered daisies
and sent them to Bab.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It was us!" suddenly shouted Baby. "Us was werry nice!" remarked the
little lady, with great satisfaction.

But Donald was crying.

Auntie laid her hand on his head.

"You were right, dear, when you said you were sure the pigeon came for
something. He came to you with a message from the God of little
children, who says, 'Whatsoever ye have done unto one of the least of
these, ye have done it unto Me.'"




SAVED BY AN ALBATROSS.


The following story is another example of the truth that is stranger
than fiction:

During a voyage made by the bark _Gladstone_ from London to Sydney, in
Australia, on the 22d of October, while the vessel was in latitude
forty-two degrees south, and longitude ninety degrees east, a seaman
fell overboard from the starboard gangway. The bark was scudding along
with a rough sea and moderate wind, but on the alarm of "Man overboard"
being given, she was rounded to, and the starboard life-boat was
lowered, manned by the chief officer and four men.

A search for the unfortunate man was made, but owing to the roughness of
the sea he could not be discovered, but the boat steered to the spot
where he was last seen. Here they found him floating, but exhausted,
clinging for bare life to the legs and wings of a huge albatross.

The bird had swooped down on the man while the latter was struggling
with the waves, and attempted to peck him with his powerful beak. Twice
the bird attacked his prey unsuccessfully, being beaten off by the
desperate sailor battling with two enemies--the water and the
albatross--both greedy and insatiable. For the third time the huge white
form of the bird hovered over the seaman preparatory to a final swoop.

The bird, eager for its meal, fanned its victim with its wide-spread
wings. Suddenly it occurred to him that the huge form so close to his
face might become his involuntary rescuer. Quick as thought he reached
up and seized the bird, which he proceeded to strangle with all his
might. The huge creature struggled with wings and paddles to free
itself.

In the contest the sailor was beaten black and blue, and cruelly
lacerated, but he held his own, and slowly the bird quivered and died.
The carcass floated lightly on the waves, its feathers forming a support
for the exhausted man, who had so narrowly escaped a lingering death.

But another danger awaited him. He was not much of a swimmer, and the
excitement of the extraordinary conflict began to tell upon him. He was
faint and grew giddy. But with one arm around the albatross's body under
the wings, and a hand clutching the bird's feet, the sailor awaited his
chance of rescue. Presently he heard his comrades shout from the boat,
and in a few minutes more was safe on board the bark, though a good deal
shaken and exhausted.




PREPARING FOR THE FOURTH OF JULY.

BY A. W. ROBERTS.


Fourth of July is coming, boys, and we must do something to celebrate
the anniversary of the glorious Declaration of Independence.

Let us see if we can not plan something that will be better and
pleasanter than setting off fire-crackers, firing pistols, guns, and toy
cannons. All these things make a hideous racket, which annoys sick and
delicate persons, to say nothing of the serious accidents that have so
often turned the great national holiday into a day of pain and sorrow
for many a boy who started out in the morning to have a good time, and
ended before night with bandaged hands and aching heads. It will be much
better for you to be content with seeing the public display of
fire-works which will take place in almost every village, managed by men
who are used to handling these dangerous articles, than to run the risk
of losing an eye or a hand in the reckless use of explosive toys.

There are many pleasant ways in which you can celebrate the Fourth
without any danger. There is no reason why you shouldn't have a supply
of lanterns for one thing, and make the woods and lawns and the inside
and outside of your houses just as bright as possible. I am going to
have a great illumination. My lanterns were all finished up a week ago,
and now I am going to tell you just how I made them, so that if you like
you can have as many and as great a variety as are now piled up in one
corner of my room all ready for the evening of the glorious Fourth.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

My first lantern (Fig. 1) is made out of a Chicago corned-beef can, of
which I procured a number from our grocery man. Having thoroughly washed
them out with hot water and soda, I took them to a friendly tinsmith,
who cut out from the sides the squares, circles, and ellipses. Over
these I pasted red, white, and blue tissue-paper, while, to make the
lantern still more luminous, holes were punched through the tin sides in
various designs. This lantern can be either suspended with wires, or
stood on window-sills, balconies, etc.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

My next lantern (Fig. 2) is an imitation of the Chinese "bucket"
lantern. The top consists of a strip of pasteboard one inch in breadth,
the ends of which are sewed together, thus forming a circle, with a
diameter of about seven inches. The bottom consists of a circular piece
of pasteboard. The body of the lantern is composed of one piece of
tissue-paper, either red, white, or blue in color, which is pasted to
the top band and to the circular bottom piece. The lantern is suspended
by means of three pieces of stout thread or fine wire as shown in the
illustration.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

Fig. 3 is a folding lantern made of three pieces of pasteboard of
uniform size, on which designs in stars, shields, squares, and circles
are drawn previous to cutting them out with a chisel and scissors. The
small circles or holes shown in the illustration are burned through the
pasteboard with a red-hot wire or poker. Red, white, and blue
tissue-paper is pasted on the inside to produce the colored effects. The
sides of pasteboard are fastened together on the inside with strips of
silk, muslin, or calico by means of glue. The bottom of the lantern
consists of a triangular piece of pasteboard, A, which is fastened to
the bottom of the middle square, B, also by means of a strip of silk. At
the corners, C, C, C, C, C, small holes are made with a very coarse
darning-needle. The three square sides of pasteboard when brought
together form a triangle equal to that of the bottom piece, B. Fine wire
or coarse thread is then passed through the holes, C, C, C, C, C, and
tied. The result is a very light and showy lantern of triangular form,
which can be suspended by fine wire or thread. The advantage of this
lantern over others is that after using it it can be untied, folded
together, and packed away until the next Fourth arrives. The can lantern
can also be used for many years by re-covering it with tissue-paper when
necessary, thus saving expense and trouble.

In making designs for lanterns always have them bold and strong. The
effects will then be satisfactory, whereas fine and finicky work on a
lantern is all lost when viewed from a short distance.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

What bothered me most in my lantern venture was to obtain holders for
the candles that would not take fire when the candles burned down, and
thus endanger the wood-work round about. At last I hit upon three styles
of home-made fire-proof candle-holders. The first is shown in Fig. 4. It
consists of a raw potato cut into square slices three-quarters of an
inch thick. These are bevelled at the sides as shown in the figure.
Half-way through the centre of the slice a hole is bored, into which the
candle is inserted. This holder is fastened to the bottom of the lantern
by means of pins, which are driven through the sides of the potato and
into the pasteboard.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

Fig. 5 consists of three thicknesses of tin-foil, formed on a piece of
wood of the same diameter as that of the candle. To form the end of the
holder the tin-foil is solidly twisted together to the extent of an
inch. When using this holder a hole is bored into the bottom of the
lantern, through which the twisted end of the holder is passed and
clinched on the under side.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

Fig. 6 is made of a strip of thin tin or sheet-lead, the ends of which,
when brought together, form a circle. The two square projections on the
bottom of the strip are passed into two slots in the bottom of the
lantern, and bent back so as to fasten the holder securely. The price of
adamantine candles in New York city that will burn three hours is three
dollars per hundred. All the illuminating material above described is
very inexpensive, and more effective than the imported Chinese lanterns.
The fun of making them, the lessons learned in utilizing and putting
together various materials, the combining of colors in various designs,
more than repay one for all the trouble.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

In a previous number of YOUNG PEOPLE something was told you about gas
balloons. They involve the use of chemicals. To my mind, the hot-air
balloon is a great deal better and less expensive to manage. Make your
balloons after the manner described in the article in No. 136. Now comes
the business of inflating them. There are some difficulties to contend
with, but with a little care you will be successful. The following is
the best method according to my experience. Secure a short piece of old
stove-pipe, and place the lower end on two bricks (Fig. 7), a space
being left between them which is to answer as a draught-hole. The back
and sides are then built up with bricks to prevent its falling. A fire
is kindled in the stove-pipe, which is then filled with charcoal to
one-third of its depth. As soon as the bottom of the pipe becomes
red-hot, the mouth of the balloon is held over the top of the pipe so as
to allow the hot air and gas to pass into and inflate it.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

In balloons bought at stores the fire-ball is fastened where the fine
wires intersect one another at the mouth of the balloon (Fig. 8). When
inflating the balloon by means of the stove-pipe, the fire-ball will
have to be removed, as otherwise it would be destroyed when holding the
mouth of the balloon over the top of the pipe. After removing the ball,
fasten it on a thin wire hook so that the instant the balloon is
inflated the fire-ball can be lit and hooked on to its position in the
centre of the mouth of the balloon (Fig. 8). By this means the balloon
will remain inflated at least one half-hour longer, and will travel many
miles further than when relying entirely for a supply of hot air from
the fire-ball alone.

When sending off a fire-balloon at night, the hook must be shortened up
close to the mouth of the balloon, so that the entire body of the
balloon is illuminated; for daylight effect the hook is made longer, as
shown in the picture. The best material for making the fire-ball is
cotton batting saturated with a solution of two-thirds alcohol and
one-third turpentine. It is a good plan to attach a postal card on which
your address is written, and a request to the finder of the balloon that
he will mail the card back to you with a memorandum on it where and at
what time the balloon arrived. In this way you will know exactly how
many miles and at what rate of speed your balloon has travelled.




GRANDFATHER KNITTING.

BY S. S. CONANT.


  Lie quietly, baby grandson, while mother dear is away;
  Out in the beautiful meadow she's raking the new-mown hay.
  It's long since I went with the mowers, because I am growing old,
  And they leave me at home with my knitting, and give me baby to hold.

  It seems but yesterday, baby, that I was strong and hale,
  And not a comrade could lead me at swinging the scythe or flail;
  To wrestle or dance I was always the first upon the ground,
  And there was not a swifter runner in all the country round.

  But now I am hardly able to totter across the floor:
  And instead of mowing the meadow, I sun myself at the door.
  When I remember my manhood, it's hard to be reconciled
  To sit at home with my knitting, and tending a little child.

  And yet we are comrades, baby: at the door of this life you lie,
  And I at the door am waiting of life beyond the sky.
  To a brave and hearty manhood your infant frame will grow,
  And young again I shall waken in the Land to which I go!

[Illustration]




[Illustration: A GREENWOOD SCENE.]


  Who so light of heart as we,
  Dancing in the greenwood free,
  Tripping, skipping, to and fro,
  Laughing, gliding, heel and toe?
  Mag and Robin, Jack and Nell,
  Don't you think we polka well?

  Merry Roger blows a horn,
  And upon the breezes borne
  Sounds the summons, "Come and share
  Fun within the greenwood fair."
  All the family are here:
  Father, mother, baby dear.
  Who so light of heart as we
  Dancing 'neath the greenwood tree?




OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.


  "Green gravel, green gravel, how green the grass grows!"

A ring of little boys and girls were singing this the other evening,
their hands joined, and their faces flushed with the merry exercise. A
lady who was looking at them said to the Postmistress:

"Dear me, that sight takes me a long way back into the past. Fifty years
ago I used to sing that song with my little brothers and sisters, and we
played just as those children do. It seems like yesterday."

Green gravel! The Postmistress understands why the grass is said to be
green. It has been just as bright and soft as it now is every summer
that she can remember, but she never saw green gravel. Did you?

       *       *       *       *       *

  SEARGEANT BLUFFS, IOWA.

     My papa made me a present of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. I enjoy the
     stories very much, and especially the letters. My mamma taught me
     to sew my papers before reading them. I am a little girl eight
     years old. I go to school, and have four studies--arithmetic,
     geography, reading, and spelling. I have taken one term in music
     lessons. I am learning how to do fancy-work. The first work I did
     was a motto, and now I am making a toilet set for my room. It is
     made of white honeycomb canvas, and worked with blue worsted. I
     also do many little things to help my mamma. My pets are a
     canary-bird named Fritz, who sings very sweetly, a tabby cat, and a
     little baby brother, the sweetest of all. His name is Arthur. He
     has learned lots of cunning things. I will tell you some of them.
     He can tell all the animals on his blocks, and pat-i-cake, and
     knock at the door, and lift up the latch. He is a year and a half
     old.

  CLARA A. H.

Kiss Arthur for me, please. Tell mamma the Postmistress thinks little
Clara must be a clever little helper.

       *       *       *       *       *

  COLORADO SPRINGS, COLORADO.

     We came here from Vermont because papa was sick, and we have been
     in Colorado about two years. We can see a good many mountains from
     this place. Pike's Peak is the highest, and Cameron's Cone is a
     mountain next to Pike's Peak. There is also a mountain called Mount
     Garfield, which was named for President Garfield soon after he was
     shot.

     I have three little boats, and I sail them in the irrigating
     ditches. I haven't any pets, but am trying to tame some gophers
     which live under a little store-house on our grounds. They are
     something like chipmunks, but not so pretty. Sometimes we see and
     hear a robin, and it makes us very happy, because it seems like
     home; and when I am gathering flowers I now and then find a
     dandelion, and we are all glad to see it, for the same reason. We
     find beautiful flowers here; lupins are the most common just now,
     and there are some flowers much like the buttercups we used to see
     at home.

     My birthday was the 5th of May. I was eight years old. I had some
     nice presents--_Tom Brown's School-Days_, and a scrap-book made by
     the directions in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 122, a beautiful
     two-bladed knife, and a birthday cake with nine candles on it--one
     for each year, and one to grow on. Mamma took me to Manitou for a
     birthday treat; and if I did not think it would make my letter too
     long, I would like to tell you about Manitou. It is right at the
     foot of Pike's Peak, and there are mineral springs there bubbling
     up out of stone basins, and wonderful canons leading into the
     mountains in every direction, in which beautiful flowers grow, and
     there is a large cave with more than seventy rooms in it. We pass
     the famous "Garden of the Gods" in going there.

     I made a cross-word enigma, which I send you. Please print my
     letter.

  EDWARD DANA S.

I hope you will succeed in taming the gophers. What a delightful
birthday you had! It will help you to be happy all the year. Perhaps
some little reader may be puzzled to know what an irrigating ditch
means. It is a ditch dug for the purpose of holding water which is
brought to it from some river or lake. By means of little sluice-gates
this water is turned over the meadows or pastures, which would otherwise
be dry and parched. In parts of our country where the climate is dry,
and rain seldom falls, or falls only in what is called the rainy season,
farmers have to irrigate their ground in this way.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PLAINFIELD, NEW JERSEY.

     I thought I would write you about our little chickens without a
     mother; she died when the chickens were ten days old. We put them
     in a big box with a feather duster, and brought them in by the
     fire; they all cuddled under the duster, and are doing beautifully,
     and are growing big and fat. If any boys or girls have young
     chickens that have lost their mother, they should put them in a
     warm place with a feather duster. I think YOUNG PEOPLE is lovely.

  JOSIE L. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SAVANNAH, GEORGIA.

     I have a pony whose name is Dixie. He eats molasses candy, and
     follows me around the yard to get it. When a gate is shut tight, he
     can open it with his teeth. I am eight years old, and mamma is
     writing this for me, because I am just learning to write.

  ALBERT R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MORRISON, ILLINOIS.

     I have just been reading some of the letters in Our Post-office
     Box, and it came into my head to write one myself, though I am not
     at all sure it will ever be published. I have always attended a
     private school until lately, when my dear teacher went to Wisconsin
     to live, so now I study at home. I enjoy the paper very much,
     especially the Jimmy Brown stories. Even papa likes to look at the
     pictures in it. I have no brothers or sisters, but I have a cousin,
     only a little older than I am, who lives next door to me, and we
     are almost like sisters. I do want some kind of pet so much, and
     none of us can think of any except papa, who says I might have a
     monkey, but I don't know about that. Can you think of some pet
     suitable for a little girl ten years old?

  KATE E.

Some little girl of Kate's age may answer this question.

       *       *       *       *       *

  INLAND, OHIO.

     I thought I would write to you and tell you about my pets. I have a
     Scotch terrier by the name of Cap; he is very black. When he wants
     to get into the house he will stand on the porch and bark. Then if
     we do not let him in, he will go to the other door and bump against
     it. If we do not let him in then, he will go under the house or out
     to the barn. I have a canary-bird whose name is Dick. He sings
     every time we sew on the sewing-machine. I am a little girl nine
     years old. I help mamma to wash the dishes and sweep the floor. I
     am sewing carpet rags to-day. My brother is writing this letter for
     me. We all think that "Mr. Stubbs's Brother" is very interesting.
     "Toby Tyler" was the best juvenile story ever written; that is, if
     you leave the judging to our family. I hope this is not too long to
     be printed.

  ARLIN EDITH H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PALISADE, NEVADA.

     I am a reader of your paper, and like it very much. I am interested
     in "Mr. Stubbs's Brother." I read "Toby Tyler" in a book some time
     ago, and liked it very much. I was glad to find out that "Toby" and
     "Mr. Stubbs's Brother" were the same, and that I would learn more
     about the funny boy and his droll experiences.

     I notice that the little girls tell about their pets. All I have
     are a dear little baby sister, an old cat, and a canary-bird that
     sings sweetly. One day an accident happened to it; its leg was
     broken, which made it very sad for a while. I attend school
     regularly, but our school will close soon, and then the scholars
     will have fun roaming over the hills for wild flowers. Good-by.

  T. N. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

The little lovers of puss are numbered by thousands, and every one of
them will stroke his or her own pet for Rosie's sake after reading this
pretty story:

     Among the many pets we kept years ago, when living in the country,
     were a beautiful but rather wild-natured cat and an aviary of
     doves.

     Judge of the dismay with which we found one morning that Rosie had
     been shut up all night with these doves, and was even then lying in
     an inner cage fast asleep in the same nest with two unfledged
     little birds.

     Of course the first impression was that Rosie had made a supper off
     some of the inmates of the aviary, but, on counting them, not one
     was missing, and the involuntary prisoner on being released was
     found to be ravenously hungry, which made her forbearance in the
     matter all the more extraordinary, and may well be noted as a
     wonderful piece of self-denial.

       *       *       *       *       *

  AUSTEN, TEXAS.

     This is the first year I have been taking your paper, and I like it
     very much. Our home is called Honeysuckle Glen, because we have so
     many honeysuckles; our yard is full of them. We have a great many
     different kinds of birds that are building nests all around in the
     trees and bushes in the yard. There is an old watering-pot hanging
     out in the yard in one of the trees, and a pretty little wren has
     built her nest in it. I am eleven years old, and I have a sweet
     little sister two years old, with soft golden curls, fair skin, and
     blue eyes. We have a sweet little canary, and it sings beautifully.
     I have not the first numbers of "Talking Leaves." I am saving my
     papers up, as I expect to have them bound some time. The new
     Capitol building is progressing; it is going to be a grand
     building. The old Capitol burned down last November, and I saw the
     fire; it was a beautiful yet sad sight.

  NELLIE B.

       *       *       *       *       *

A USEFUL GANDER.

In a little village in Germany a gander used to lead a blind old woman
to church every Sunday, dragging her along and holding her gown in its
beak. As soon as she was seated in her pew the old fellow walked into
the church-yard, where he staid until the service was over; then he
appeared at the door, ready to lead his mistress home. One day a friend
called on the old lady, and was surprised to find that she had gone out.
"Oh," said her little grandchild, "there is nothing to fear; the gander
will take care of her."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAMB AND THE PONY.

A curious friendship once existed between a lamb and a pony. The lamb,
which was purchased by a farmer in England from a passing shepherd, was
very wild, and grieved at being separated from the flock. It was an odd,
sturdy-looking creature with a black face. The farmer put it in a meadow
in company with a cow and a little white pony. The lamb took no notice
of the cow; but the pony seemed to captivate its heart at once. Wherever
the one went, the other followed. If people gathered, as was natural, to
look at the companions, the lamb would slip under the pony and pop out
its head between his fore or hind legs with an air of perfect security.
At night it went regularly to the stable, and slept in the manger near
its favorite. If, as sometimes happened, the pony was taken to draw the
farmer's wife to market, the lamb bleated pitifully all the time it was
away, and frisked about joyfully on its return.

One day, to test its love, its owner carried the lamb to a pasture where
a flock of sheep was grazing. The pony went too. In the course of the
day the farmer came after the pony, and mounting him, rode homeward.
Presently he looked behind. Yes, there came the shaggy black-faced lamb,
forsaking its own kindred, and rushing on its eager legs to overtake its
adopted friend.

Whether the pony returned this affection we do not know. It neither
resented it nor appeared weary of it, at all events.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PARIS HILL, MAINE.

     I am only seven years old, and can not write very well, but I want
     to tell you how much I like HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. My grandfather
     gave it to me for a Christmas present. I read the stories to my
     mother. I liked "The Little Dolls' Dressmaker" so much! I was sorry
     when it was finished. My home is in the highest village in Maine,
     and we can see the White Mountains against the sky in the distance.
     I do not go to school; my mother teaches me at home. I am afraid I
     have written too much. Good-by.

  MAYNARD M.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Postmistress thinks that Bessie Alexander has written a very pretty
story about Carlos and the mermaid. But the story would have been
prettier still had the little boy come to life again here on earth. Make
it a rule, dear young contributors, to let your stories end happily. As
many smiles and as few tears as possible, little dears:

CARLOS AND THE QUEEN SEA-SHELL.

     It was sunset. The last rays of the sun were cast over the placid
     waters of the Mediterranean Sea, and lit up its surface with its
     rosy light. In one of the many vessels which traversed its waters
     was, among the other passengers, a child, a little Italian boy,
     Carlos Arditi. He was in the care of his uncle, who was taking him
     to his mother in Italy. Little Carlos then lay peacefully sleeping
     in his little berth.

     How different was the scene from that which took place two hours
     later! The wind was blowing a terrific hurricane, and all was
     confusion on board the ship. The Captain tried in vain to make the
     sailors hear his commands, and even through the speaking-trumpet it
     was impossible to hear him above the noise of the tempest. All
     efforts to save the good ship were useless, and it soon fell on its
     side, while the wind was blowing with terrific force. Some people
     were clinging to the ship, while others were struggling in the
     water, among whom was little Carlos. He had just taken hold on a
     broken spar, when he saw a beautiful lily-white hand come up out of
     the water by his side. It took him by the waist, and drew him below
     the waves. When he was under-water he saw that a lovely mermaid had
     taken him down to the bottom of the sea.

     "I am the mermaid Queen Sea-shell," said she, in a voice which
     murmured like a little brook which flows over the pebbles at its
     bottom. "And," she added, "you are to stay with me, and you shall
     never return to earth again. You will not find me unkind, and you
     shall play in my beautiful garden, eat of the delicious fruits, and
     pick all the flowers which grow there."

     Until this time Carlos had remained silent. Now he said:

     "Oh, dear Queen, I would stay with you, and oh, how happy would I
     be! but remember the madre watching for her Carlos to come. If I
     have anything good enough for you to take, take it in return, but I
     must see the dear madre again."

     "As you say, child," replied the mermaid. "Give me thy voice, and
     thou shalt go. But first sing."

     Carlos raised his large brown eyes to Sea-shell's face, and began.
     The childish voice rose sweet and clear, but when the song was
     finished Sea-shell shook her head.

     "The waves sing as well as that," she said. "But list, child, give
     me thyself as thou art on earth, and thou shalt go home."

     Carlos did not answer; he only looked up at the sweet face before
     him. He did not understand her. Suddenly an overpowering drowsiness
     came over him, and he shut his eyes. When he awoke he was still by
     Sea-shell, but no longer a mortal child, but a beautiful spirit.

     "Come, Carlos," then said Sea-shell; "you are going home."

     Then she wrapped him in her loving embrace, and carried him far
     away above the mighty waters, and still farther up among the
     clouds.

     "Where am I going, dear Queen?" asked Carlos.

     "To your home, child," answered Sea-shell; "and your home to you
     now, little one, is heaven."

     "But the madre?" he asked, eagerly.

     "The madre will be with you," replied the Queen.

     And the mermaid's promise came true.

  BESSIE ALEXANDER, Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *

C. Y. P. R. U.

Most girls are fond of the needle, and enjoy the housekeeping duties
which fall naturally under womanly care. Here and there, however, we
find one who prefers to use a hammer and nails, to make boxes, hang
pictures, and mend broken tables and chairs. There is nothing wrong in
indulging such tastes, if you have them. In Atlanta, Georgia, there is a
young lady who practices the art of making shoes. Not long ago a
gentleman sent his little nephew with a pair of boots to be mended,
directing him to go to the nearest place. Returning, the child
astonished his uncle by remarking that "she" said so and so. Then it was
discovered that there was in the neighborhood a young girl under twenty
years of age, the daughter of a shoemaker, who daily works at the trade
herself, not only mending, but making in good style both boots and
shoes. For several years she has thus been engaged, and has won the
respect and patronage of a large circle of appreciative families. We
think this clever young girl deserves great praise.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO PUZZLERS.--In sending your puzzles please state whether you wish to
have your full name, your initials, or your _nom de plume_ appear. Do
not make puzzles on the names of great and good men who have lately
died. We can not use the names of Longfellow, Emerson, or Dean Stanley
in puzzles, acrostics, or enigmas. By doing so we should show a lack of
proper veneration for the poets and thinkers whose death has made the
world sorrowful.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSTANT READER.--_The Bazar Book of Decorum_, published at $1 by
Messrs. Harper & Brothers, is a manual of information on the subject
which interests you. There is also a valuable book entitled _Social
Etiquette and Home Culture_, which is published in the "Franklin Square
Library." Its price is 20 cents, and it touches very pleasantly on most
points which concern good manners.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little folks who love to play with the skipping-rope should not try to
jump too long at a time. "Keeping up" to fifty, sixty, or a hundred
without resting is violent exercise, and dangerous to health.

       *       *       *       *       *

We would call the attention of the C. Y. P. R. U. this week to Part I.
of Mr. James Payn's description of the terrible scenes that followed the
wreck of the English ship _Wager_, told under the head of "Peril and
Privation." The story of "A Little Duke," by Mrs. Elizabeth Abercrombie,
gives an interesting picture of the life of a royal child in the
seventeenth century. One of the most remarkable incidents that ever
occurred in a sea-faring life is told under the head of "Saved by an
Albatross." What Mr. Roberts has to say about "Preparing for Fourth of
July" will, we know, set a great many busy fingers to work, the result
being some very pleasant effects in the way of illumination on the
evening of the great day.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

TWO WORD SQUARES.

1.--1. A desolate country. 2. To decorate. 3. Compact. 4. A moment. 5.
One who finishes.

  EMPIRE CITY.

2.--1. A holy person. 2. A marksman. 3. An idea. 4. A drink. 5. A
ringlet.

  WILL A. METTE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

NUMERICAL CHARADE--(_To Empire City_).

  My 1, 2, 3, 4 is an animal, so I've heard.
  My 5, 6, 7 is an animal, not a bird.
  My whole is a kind of cloth; now, mind,
  In Webster's book its name you will find.

  WILL A. METTE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

NUMERICAL ENIGMA.

  My whole ought to be found in every house, and I am composed of 18
      letters.
  My 1, 2, 6, 4 is a musical instrument.
  My 18, 2, 12, 17, 5 is a bird of prey.
  My 8, 15, 10 is a pronoun.
  My 7, 10, 12, 2, 3 is sweet.
  My 13, 9, 14 is the name of a poet.

  EUREKA.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

1. A Spanish word which means chalk. 2. A girl's name. 3. Permission. 4.
Creeping vines. 5. A girl's name. 6. A vessel. Primals and finals
compose the name of a celebrated Roman soldier and conqueror.

  G. E.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

THREE DIAMONDS.

1.--1. A letter. 2. Something that does not like the sun. 3. A kind of
nut. 4. A period. 5. A letter.

  MARION.

2.--1. A letter. 2. To recline. 3. A journal. 4. To wander. 5. A letter.

3.--1. In spice. 2. Owed. 3. Bright. 4. Conclusion. 5. In youth.

  ROBIN ADAIR.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.

BEHEADINGS.

1. I am an article of dress; behead me, and no family should be without
me.

2. I am what a boy's knife ought to be; behead me, and I am a musical
instrument.

3. I am a vessel; behead me, and I am part of the human body.

4. I am always to be found in a good dairy; behead me, and I am a
stationer's measure.

5. I am something useful on the table; behead me, and I am what no boy
should be at school.

6. I am a wild animal; behead me, and no boat should be without me.

7. I am a motion of the eye; behead me, and I am a useful fluid.

8. I am useful when one wishes to cross a river; behead me, and I am
part of a mountain.

  ROGER DERBY.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 136.

No. 1.

M-ark. F-rank. E-ben. E-van. O-bed. O-liver. T-heron. O-scar. K-ate.
M-abel. O-live. G-race.

No. 2.

America.

      P           C
    C A T       T O M
  P A R I S   C O M E T
    T I N       M E N
      S           T

No. 4.

Chattanooga.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been received from Florence, Mabel, and
Annie Knight, "North Star," "Little Lizzie," Mary and Helen, Julia,
Edgar Seeman, Nelse Walton, Imogene Starr, Ella Dana, Maggie Phillips,
Richard Towers, Robbie and Freddie, "Twin Sisters," Carrie B. Kunkel,
Carrie V. Latimer. Mabel Sykes, Elvira Urisarri, Francis Arrowsmith,
Raymond Lincolnton, "Eureka," Harry Johnston, S. Brewster, John
Trotwood, Viola La Mont, Elsie Dee, Jack Chandler, William Holmes, Tom,
"Albatross," "Fern Heather," Margaret Lamb, Marion, "A. B. C.," and
Jacob D. Jais.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_For Exchanges, see 2d and 3d pages of cover._]




[Illustration: COACHING.]




"ROME AND CARTHAGE."


This game is very popular with the school-boys of Havana, Cuba. It is a
very jolly, harmless sport, and would make a good summer pastime for the
boys of Northern schools when snow-ball fights are out of season.

"Rome and Carthage" is played as follows: The boys are divided into two
armies, each of which chooses its leader or general. Each side must be
provided with a banner. The game is played so much in Havana that the
boys there have handsome flags with "Rome" or "Carthage" worked or
stamped upon them, but any gay piece of flannel will do. The weapon is a
soft rubber ball, each soldier being provided with one or more. These
balls are very soft indeed, and will not hurt even when thrown with
great force. They cost very little when bought by the quantity. When the
armies are equipped, the two leaders draw lots to see which side shall
man the fort. Now in this country a good fort might be made in the open
field of logs and bushes. In Havana it is generally a platform built in
the court-yard of the school-house, as nearly all large buildings in
that city are built with an open square in the centre.

The army who defend the fort plant their banner near the centre in
front, while the attacking party station themselves about thirty feet
away, with their banner fastened securely in the ground. Then, at a
signal from the leaders, the fight begins in earnest, and the rubber
balls fly through the air in all directions. Whoever catches a ball in
his hand retains it as captured ammunition, and can return fire with it;
but if any soldier is so clumsy as to allow himself to be hit, he is
considered dead, and must immediately leave the ranks.

Ducking and scrambling to avoid the bullets occasion a great deal of
fun, and require not a little dexterity, while much skill is necessary
to make true and rapid shots. No wrestling or striking with fists is
allowed.

Presuming the Carthaginians to be the attacking party, they must make
great efforts to capture the Roman banner by assault; and if they can
successfully carry it past a line drawn about ten feet in front of the
fort, the Romans are conquered, and must yield the fort to the victors
and take the field themselves. If, on the other hand, the Romans can, by
making a sortie, capture the Carthaginian colors, or by skillfully
shooting the invaders save their own standard, they continue in
possession of the fortification.

The game generally lasts about twenty minutes, although a vigorous
assault will sometimes decide it much quicker. If in half an hour
neither party conquers, the armies are called to order, ammunition is
again equally divided, and the contest renewed. The question of
superiority is decided, as in many games of chance, by the best two in
three matches. If an army is proved by continued defeat to be worthless,
it is disbanded, and a new distribution of soldiers arranged.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FULL MOON OF COCOA-NUTS.

In Bombay, when the rainy season is over, the fishermen and their wives
and children gather by hundreds to keep a festival which they call "the
full moon of cocoa-nuts."

The feast occupies two whole days. The idea which inspires it is that
the sea is very powerful. The simple-minded people think they ought to
praise it because it gives them their bread, and so as they stand on
the shore they beg it to be good to them. They ask it, in caressing
words, not to be angry or stormy when their little boats shall go out,
and they tell it they hope it will give them plenty of fish.

Not only the fishermen, but owners of boats and ship-builders, and
sometimes rich merchants, go to the sea-side to court the favor of grim
old Neptune. Every person carries a gift of cocoa-nuts. Wading out into
the surf as far as possible, he flings the rough brown fruit into the
waves. After the cocoa-nut has been received by the billows, the devout
finish by offering a crown of flowers. The waters are covered with
beautiful wreaths and garlands, which are given in thankfulness for past
favors.

Little does the ocean care for the flowers and the fruit which are
poured into its depths. But the festival makes the grave men and women
as eager and happy as children, and when they go home, at the end of the
second day, they carry with them memories which will make them joyful as
long as they think of "the full moon of cocoa-nuts."




[Illustration: GOING TO SPEND THE SUMMER AT THE SEA-SIDE.]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, June 27, 1882, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JUNE ***

***** This file should be named 58357.txt or 58357.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/3/5/58357/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

