The Project Gutenberg EBook of Slow Burn, by Henry Still

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Slow Burn

Author: Henry Still

Release Date: April 24, 2019 [EBook #59345]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLOW BURN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               SLOW BURN

                            BY HENRY STILL

              _The problems of space were multiple enough
             without the opinions and treachery of Senator
           McKelvie--who really put the "fat into the fire".
                All Kevin had to do was get it out...._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, October 1955.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Tell 'em to look sharp, Bert. This pickup's got to be good." Kevin
Morrow gulped the last of his coffee and felt its bitter acid gurgle
around his stomach. He stared moodily through the plastic port
where the spangled skirt of stars glittered against the black satin
of endless night and a familiar curve of the space station swung
ponderously around its hub.

Four space-suited tugmen floated languidly outside the rim. Beyond them
the gleaming black and white moonship tugged gently at her mooring
lines, as though anxious to be off.

Bert Alexander radioed quiet instructions to the tugmen.

"Why the hell couldn't he stay down there and mind his own business?"
Kevin growled. "McKelvie's been after our hide ever since we got the
appropriation, and now this." He slapped the flimsy radio-gram.

He looked up as the control room hatch opened. Jones came in from the
astronomy section.

"Morning, commander," he said. "You guys had breakfast yet? Mess closes
in 30 minutes." Kevin shook his head.

"We're not hungry," Bert filled in.

"You think you've got nerves?" Jones chuckled. "I just looked in on
Mark. He's sleeping like a baby. You wouldn't think the biggest day of
his life is three hours away."

"McKelvie's coming up to kibitz," Morrow said.

"McKelvie!"

"The one and only," Bert said. "Here, read all about it."

He handed over the morning facsimile torn off the machine when the
station hurtled over New England at 18,000 miles an hour. The upper
half of the sheet bore a picture of the white-maned senator. Clearly
etched on his face were the lines of too many half-rigged elections,
too many compromises.

Beneath the picture were quotes from his speech the night before.

"As chairman of your congressional watchdog committee," the senator
had said, "I'll see that there's no more waste and corruption on this
space project. For three years they've been building a rocket--the moon
rocket, they call it--out there at the space station.

"I haven't seen that rocket," the senator had continued. "All I've seen
is five billion of your tax dollars flying into the vacuum of space.
They tell me a man named Mark Kramer is going to fly out in that rocket
and circle the moon.

"But he will fail," McKelvie had promised. "If God had intended man
to fly to the moon, he would have given us wings to do it. Tomorrow I
shall fly out to this space station, even at the risk of my life. I'll
report the waste and corruption out there, and I'll report the failure
of the moon rocket."

Jones crumpled the paper and aimed at the waste basket.

"Pardon me while I vomit," he said.

"We've been there," Kevin sighed deeply. "I suppose Max Gordon will be
happy."

"He'll wear a hole in his tongue on McKelvie's boots," Bert said
bitterly.

"Is it that bad?"

"How else would he get a first class spaceman's badge?" Morrow said.
"He can't add two and two. But if stool pigeons had wings, he'd fly
like a jet. We can't move up here without McKelvie knowing and howling
about it.

"Don't worry," Jones said, "If the moon rocket makes it, public opinion
will take care of the senator."

"If he doesn't take care of us first," Kevin said darkly. "He'll be
aboard in 15 minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dawn touched the High Sierras as the station whirled in from the
Pacific, 500 miles high.

"Bert. Get me a radar fix on White Sands."

Morrow huddled over the small computer, feeding in radar information as
it came from his assistant.

"Rocket away!" Blared a radio speaker on the bulkhead. The same message
carried to the four space-suited tugmen floating beyond the rim of the
wheel, linked with life-lines.

Jones watched interestedly out the port.

"There she is!" he yelled.

Sunlight caught the ascending rocket, held it in a splash of light.
The intercept technique was routine now, a matter of timing, but for
a moment Kevin succumbed to the frightening optical illusion that the
rocket was approaching apex far below the station. Then, slowly, the
slender cylinder matched velocity and pulled into the orbit, crept to
its destination.

With deceptive ease, the four human tugs attached magnetic shoes and
guided the projectile into the space station hub with short, expert
blasts of heavy rocket pistols.

"Take over Bert," Morrow directed, "I guess I'm the official greeter."
He hurried out of the control room, through a short connecting tube
and emerged floating in the central space surrounding the hub where
artificial gravity fell to zero. Air pressure was normal to transfer
passengers without space suits.

The connecting lock clanked open. The rocket pilot stepped out.

"He got sick," the pilot whispered to Kevin. "I swabbed him off, but
he's hoppin' mad."

The senator's mop of white hair appeared in the port. Kevin braced to
absorb a tirade, but McKelvie's deep scowl changed to an expression of
bliss as he floated weightless into the tiny room.

"Why, this is wonderful!" he sputtered. He waved his arms like a bird
and kicked experimentally with a foot.

"Grab him!" Kevin shouted. "He's gone happy with it."

The pilot was too late. McKelvie's body sailed gracefully through the
air and his head smacked the bulkhead. His eyes glazed in a frozen
expression of carefree happiness.

Kevin swore. "Now he'll accuse us of a plot against his life. Help me
get him to sick bay."

The two men guided the weightless form into a tube connecting with the
outer ring. As they pushed outward, McKelvie's weight increased until
they carried him the last 50 feet into the dispensary compartment.

Max Gordon burst wild-eyed into the room.

"What have you done to the senator?" he shouted. "Why didn't you tell
me he was coming up?" Morrow made sure McKelvie was receiving full
medical attention before he turned to the junior officer.

"He went space happy and bumped his head," Kevin said curtly, "and
there was no more reason to notify you than the rest of the crew." He
walked away. Gordon bent solicitously over his unconscious patron.

Kevin found Anderson in the passageway.

"I ordered them to start fueling Moonbeam," Bert said.

"Good. Is Mark awake?"

"Eating breakfast. The psycho's giving him a clinical chat."

"I wish it were over." Morrow brushed back his hair.

"You've really got the jitters, huh chief?"

Morrow turned angrily and then tried to laugh.

"I'd sell my job for a nickel right now, Bert. This will be touch and
go, without having the worst enemy of space flight aboard. If this ship
fails, it's more than a rocket or the death of a man. It'll set the
whole program back 50 years."

"I know," Bert answered, "but he'll make it."

Footsteps sounded in the tube outside the cabin. Mark Kramer walked in.

"Hi, chief," he grinned, "Moonbeam ready to go?"

"The techs are out now and fuel's aboard. How about you? Shouldn't you
get some rest?"

"That's all I've had since they shipped me out here." Kramer laughed.
"It'll be a snap. After all, I'll never make over two gees and pick up
7000 mph to leave you guys behind. Then I play ring around the rosy,
take a look at Luna's off side and come home. Just like that."

"Just like that," Kevin whispered meditatively. The moon rocket,
floating there outside the station's rim was ugly, designed never to
touch a planet's atmosphere, but it was the most beautiful thing man
had ever built, assembled in space from individual fragments boosted
laboriously from the Earth's surface.

Another clatter of footsteps approached the hatch. Max Gordon entered
and stood at attention as Senator McKelvie made a dignified entrance.
The senator wore an adhesive patch on his high forehead. He turned to
Kramer.

"Young man," he rumbled, "are you the fool risking your life in
that--that thing out there? You must know it'll never reach the moon. I
know it'll never--"

Kramer's face paled slightly and he moved swiftly between the two men.
Without using force, he backed the senator and Gordon through the hatch
and slammed it behind him. Anger was a knot of green snakes in his
belly.

"I want to talk to that pilot," McKelvie said belligerently.

"I'm sorry, senator. The best psychiatrists on Earth worked eight
months to condition Kramer for this flight. He must not be emotionally
disturbed. You can't talk to him."

"You forbid...?" McKelvie exploded, but Morrow intercepted smoothly.

"Gordon. I'm sure the senator would like a tour of the station. Will
you escort him?"

McKelvie's face reddened and Max opened his mouth to object.

"Gordon!" Morrow said sharply. Max closed his mouth and guided the
grumbling congressman up the tube.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Twenty minutes to blastoff," Bert reported.

"Right," Kevin acknowledged absently. He studied taped data moving in
by radio facsimile from the mammoth electronic computer on Earth.

"Our orbit's true," he said with satisfaction and wiped a sweaty palm
on his trousers. "Get the time check, Bert." Beeps from the Naval
Observatory synchronized with the space station chronometer.

"Alert Kramer."

"He's leaving the airlock now," Bert said. From the intercom, Morrow
listened to periodic reports from crew members as McKelvie and Gordon
progressed in their tour.

"Mr. Morrow?"

"Right."

"This is Adams in Section M. The senator and Gordon have been in the
line chamber for 10 minutes."

"Boot 'em out," Kevin said crisply. "Blastoff in 15 minutes."

"That machinery controls the safety lines," Bert said.

Kevin looked up with a puzzled frown, but turned back to watch Kramer
creeping along a mooring line to the moon ship. A group of tugmen
helped the space-suited figure into the rocket, dogged shut the hatch
and cleared back to the station rim.

"Station to Kramer," on the radio, "are you ready?"

"All set," came the steady voice, "give me the word."

"All right. Five minutes." Kevin turned to the intercom. "Release
safety lines."

In the weightlessness of space the cables retained their normal rigid
line from the rim of the station to the rocket. They had been under no
strain. Their shape would not change until they were reeled in.

"Two minutes," Morrow warned. Tension grew as Anderson began the slow
second count. The hatch opened. McKelvie and Gordon entered the control
room. No one noticed it.

"Five ... four ... three ... two ... one ..."

A gout of white fire jabbed from the stern of the rocket. Slowly the
ship moved forward.

Morrow watched tensely, hands gripping a safety rail.

Then his face froze in a mask of disbelief and horror.

"The lines!" he shouted. "The safety lines fouled!"

He fell sprawling as the space station lurched heavily, tipped upward
like a giant platter under the inexorable pull of the moon rocket.

Kevin scrambled back to the viewport, the shriek of tortured metal in
his ears. Horror-stricken, he saw the taut cables that had failed to
release. Then a huge section of nylon, aluminum and rubber ripped out
of the station wall, was visible a second in the rocket glare, and
vanished.

Escaping air whistled through the crippled structure. Pressure
dropped alarmingly before the series of automatic airlocks clattered
reassuringly shut.

Kevin's hand was bleeding. He staggered with the frightening new motion
of the space station. Gordon and the senator had collapsed against a
bulkhead. McKelvie's pale face twisted with fear and amazement. Blood
streaked down the pink curve of his forehead.

Individual station reports trickled through the intercom. Miraculously,
the bulk of the station had escaped damage.

"Line chamber's gone," Adams reported. "Other bulkheads holding, but
something must have jammed the line machines. They ripped right out."

"Get repair crews in to patch leaks," Morrow shouted. He turned
frantically to the radio. "Station to Moonbeam. Kramer! Are you all
right?"

He waited an agonizing minute, then a scratchy voice came through.

"Kramer, here. What the hell happened? Something gave me a terrific
yaw, but the gyro pulled me back on course. Fuel consumption high.
Otherwise I'm okay."

"You ripped out part of the station," Kevin yelled. "You're towing
extra mass. Release the safety lines if you can."

The faint answer came back, garbled by static.

Another disaster halted a new try to reach him.

With a howling rumble, the massive gyroscope case in the bulkhead split
open. The heavy wheel, spinning at 20,000 revolutions per minute,
slowly and majestically crawled out of its gimbals; the gyroscope that
stabilized the entire structure remained in its plane of revolution,
but ripped out of its moorings when the station was forcibly tilted.

Spinning like a giant top, the gyro walked slowly across the deck.
McKelvie and Gordon scrambled out of its way.

"It'll go through!" Bert shouted. Kevin leaped to a chest of emergency
patches.

The wheel ripped through the magnesium shell like a knife in soft
cheese. A gaping rent opened to the raw emptiness of space, but Morrow
was there with the patch. Before decompression could explode the four
creatures of blood and bone, the patch slapped in place, sealed by the
remaining air pressure.

Trembling violently, Kevin staggered to a chair and collapsed. Silence
rang in his ears. Anderson gripped the edge of a table to keep from
falling. Kevin turned slowly to McKelvie and Gordon.

"Come here," he said tonelessly.

"Now see here, young man--" the senator blustered.

"I said come here!"

The two men obeyed. The commander's voice held a new edge of steel.

"You were the last to leave the line control room," he said. "_Did you
touch that machinery?_"

Gordon's face was the color of paste. His mouth worked like a
suffocating fish. McKelvie recovered his bluster.

"I'm a United States senator," he stuttered, "I'll not be
threatened...."

"I'm not threatening you," Kevin said, "but if you fouled that
machinery to assure your prediction about the rocket, I'll see that you
hang. Do you realize that gyroscope was the only control we had over
the motion of this space station? Whatever it does now is the result of
the moon rocket's pull. We may not live to see that rocket again."

As though verifying Morrow's words, the lights dimmed momentarily
and returned to normal brilliance. A frightened voice came from the
squawkbox.

"Hey, chief! This is power control. We've lost the sun!"

Anderson looked out the port, studied the slowly wheeling stars.

"Mother of God," he breathed. "We're flopping ... like a flapjack over
a stove."

And the power mirrors were on only one face of the space station,
mirrors that collected the sun's radiation and converted it to power.
Now they were collecting nothing but the twinkling of the stars.

The vital light would return as the station continued its new, awkward
rotation, but would the intermittent exposure be sufficient to sustain
power?

"Shut down everything but emergency equipment," Morrow directed. "When
we get back on the sun, soak every bit of juice you can into those
batteries." He turned to Gordon and McKelvie. "Won't it be interesting
if we freeze to death, or suffocate when the air machines stop?"

Worry replaced anger as he turned abruptly away from them.

"We've got a lot of work to do, Bert," he said crisply. "See if you can
get White Sands."

"It's over the horizon, I'll try South Africa." Anderson worked with
the voice radio but static obliterated reception. "Here comes a Morse
transmission," he said at last. Morrow read slowly as tape fed out of
the translator:

"Radar shows moon rocket in proper trajectory. Where are you?"

The first impulse was to dash to the viewport and peer out. But that
would be no help in determining position.

"Radar, Bert," he whispered. Anderson verniered in the scope, measuring
true distance to Earth's surface. He read the figure, swore violently,
and readjusted the instrument.

"It can't be," he muttered at last. "This says we're 865 miles out."

"365 miles outside our orbit?" Morrow said calmly. "I was afraid of
that. That tug from the Moonbeam not only cart-wheeled us, it yanked
us out." He snatched a sheet of graph paper out of a desk drawer and
penciled a point.

"Give me a reading every 10 seconds."

Points began to connect in a curve.

And the curve was something new.

"Get Jones from astronomy," Kevin said at last. "He can help us plot
and maybe predict."

When the astronomer arrived minutes later, the space station was 1700
miles above the Earth, still shearing into space on an ascending curve.

"Get a quick look at this, Jones," Kevin spoke rapidly. "See if you can
tell where it will be two hours from now."

The astronomer studied the curve intently as it continued to grow under
Kevin's pencil.

"It may be an outward spiral," he said haltingly, "or it could be a ...
parabola."

"No!" Bert protested. "That would throw us into space. We couldn't--"

"We couldn't get back," Kevin finished grimly. "There'd better be an
alternative."

"It could be an ellipse," Jones said.

"It must be an ellipse," Bert said eagerly. "The Moonbeam couldn't have
given us 7000 mph velocity."

Abruptly the lights went out.

The radar scope faded from green to black. Morrow swore a string of
violent oaths, realizing in the same instant that anger was useless
when the power mirrors lost the sun.

He bellowed into the intercom, but the speaker was dead. Already Bert
was racing down the tube to the power compartment. Minutes later, the
intercom dial flickered red. Morrow yelled again.

"You've got to keep power to this radar set for the next half-hour.
Everything else can stop, even the air machines, but _we've got to find
out where we're going_."

The space station turned again. Power resumed and Kevin picked up the
plot.

"We're 6000 miles out!" he breathed.

"But it's flattening," Jones cried. "The curve's flattening!" Bert
loped back into the control room. Jones snatched the pencil from his
superior.

"Here," he said quickly, "I can see it now. Here's the curve. It's an
ellipse all right."

"It'll carry us out 9600 miles," Bert gasped. "No one's ever been out
that far."

"All right," Morrow said. "That crisis is past. The next question is
where are we when we come back on nadir. Bert, tell the crew what's
going on. Jones, you can help me. We've got to pick up White Sands and
get a fuel rocket up here to push."

"Good Lord, look at that!" Jones breathed. He stared out the port. The
Earth, a dazzling huge globe filling most of the heavens, swam slowly
past the plastic window. It was the first time they had been able to
see more than a convex segment of oceans and continents. Kevin looked,
soberly, and turned to the radio.

The power did not fail in the next crazy rotation of the station.

"There's the West Coast." Kevin pointed. "In a few minutes I can get
White Sands, I hope."

Jones had taken over the radar plot. At last his pencil reached a peak
and the curve started down. The station had reached the limit of its
wild plunge into space.

"Good," Kevin muttered. "See if you can extrapolate that curve and
get us an approximation where we'll cut in over the other side." The
astronomer figured rapidly and abstractedly.

"May I remind you young man," McKelvie's voice boomed, "you have a
United States senator aboard. If anything happens--"

"If anything happens, it happens to all of us," Kevin answered coldly.
"When you're ready to tell me what _did_ happen, I'm ready to listen."

Silence.

"White Sands, this is Station I. Come in please."

Kevin tried to keep his voice calm, but the lives of 90 men rode on it,
on his ability to project his words through the crazy hash of static
lacing this part of space from the multitude of radio stars. A power
rocket with extra fuel was the only instrument that could return the
space station to its normal orbit.

That rocket must come from White Sands.

White Sands did not answer.

He tried again, turned as an exclamation of dismay burst from the
astronomer. Morrow bent to look at the plotting board.

Jones had sketched a circle of the Earth, placing it in the heart of
the ellipse the space station was drawing around it.

From 9600 miles out, the line curved down and down, and down....

But it did not meet the point where the station had departed from its
orbit 500 miles above Earth's surface.

The line came down and around to kiss the Earth--almost.

"I hope it's wrong," Jones said huskily. "If I'm right, we'll come in
87 miles above the surface."

"It can't!" Morrow shouted in frustration. "We'll hit stratosphere.
It'll burn us--just long enough so we'll feel the agony before we die."

Jones rechecked his figures and shook his head. The line was still
the same. Each 10 seconds it was supported by a new radar range. The
astronomer's lightning fingers worked out a new problem.

"We have about 75 minutes to do something about it," he said. "We'll be
over the Atlantic or England when it happens."

"Station I, this is...."

The beautiful, wonderful voice burst loud and clear from the radio and
then vanished in a blurb of static.

"Oh God!" Kevin breathed. It was a prayer.

"We hear you," he shouted, procedure gone with the desperate need to
communicate with home. "Come in White Sands. Please come in!"

Faintly now the voice blurred in and out, lost altogether for vital
moments:

"... your plot. Altiac computer ... your orbit ... rocket on
standby ... as you pass."

"Yes!" Kevin shouted, gripping the short wave set with white fingers,
trying to project his words into the microphone, across the dwindling
thousands of miles of space. "Yes. Send the rocket!"

"Can they do it?" Jones asked. "The rocket, I mean."

"I don't know," Kevin said. "They're all pre-set, mass produced now,
and fuel is adjusted to come into the old orbit. They can be rigged, I
think, if there's enough time."

       *       *       *       *       *

The coast of California loomed below them now, a brown fringe holding
back the dazzling flood of the Pacific. They were 3000 miles above the
Earth, dropping sharply on the down leg of the ellipse.

At their present speed, the station appeared to be plunging directly
at the Earth. The globe was frighteningly larger each time it wobbled
across the viewport.

"Shall I call away the tugmen?" Bert asked tensely.

"I can't ask them to do it," Kevin said. "With this crazy orbit, it's
too dangerous. I'm going out."

He slipped into his space gear.

"I'm going with you," Bert said. Kevin smiled his gratitude.

In the airlock the men armed themselves with three heavy rocket
pistols each. Morrow ordered other tugmen into suits for standby.

"I wish I could do this alone, Bert," he said soberly. "But I'm glad
you're coming along. If we miss, there won't be a second chance."

They knew approximately when they would pass over the rocket launching
base, but this time it would be different. The space station would pass
at 750 miles altitude and with a new velocity. No one could be sure
the feeder rocket would make it. Unless maximum fuel had been adjusted
carefully, it might orbit out of reach below them. Rescue fuel would
take the place of a pilot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anderson and Morrow floated clear of the huge wheel, turning lazily
in the deceptive luxury of zero gravity. The familiar sensation of
exhilaration threatened to wipe out the urgency they must bring to bear
on their lone chance for survival. They could see the jagged hole where
the Moonbeam had yanked out a section of the structure.

An unintelligible buzz of voice murmured in the radios. Unconsciously
Kevin tried to squeeze the earphones against his ears, but his
heavily-gloved hands met only the rigid globe of his helmet.

"You get it, Bert?"

"No."

"This is Jones," a new voice loud and clear. "Earth says 15 seconds to
blastoff."

"Rocket away!"

Like a tiny, clear bell the words emerged from static. Bert and Kevin
gyrated their bodies so they could stare directly at the passing
panorama of Earth below. They had seen it hundreds of times, but now
250 more miles of altitude gave the illusion they were studying a
familiar landmark through the small end of a telescope.

"There it is!" Bert shouted.

A pinpoint of flame, that was it, with no apparent motion as it rose
almost vertically toward them.

Then a black dot in an infinitesimal circle of flame--the rocket
silhouetted against its own fire ... as big as a dime ... as big as a
dollar....

... as big as a basketball, the circle of flame soared up toward them.

"It's still firing!" Kevin yelled. "It'll overshoot us."

As he spoke, the fire died, but the tiny bar of the rocket, black
against the luminous surface of Earth, crawled rapidly up into their
sector of starlit blackness. Then it was above Earth's horizon, nearly
to the space station's orbit, crawling slowly along, almost to them--a
beautiful long cylinder of metal, symbol of home and a civilization
sending power to help them to safety.

Hope flashed through Kevin's mind that he was wrong, that the giant
computer and the careful hands of technicians had matched the ship to
their orbit after all.

But he was right. It passed them, angling slowly upward not 50 yards
away.

Instantly the two men rode the rocket blast of their pistols to the
nose of the huge projectile. But it carried velocity imparted by
rockets that had fired a fraction of a minute too long.

Clinging to the metal with magnetic shoes, Morrow and Anderson pressed
the triggers of the pistols, held them down, trying to push the
cylinder down and back.

Bert's heavy breathing rasped in the radio as he unconsciously used the
futile force of his muscles in the agonizing effort to move the ship.

Their pistols gave out almost simultaneously. Both reached for another.
Thin streams of propulsive gas altered the course of the rocket,
slightly, but the space station was smaller now, angling imperceptibly
away and down as the rocket pressed outward into a new, higher orbit.

The rocket pistols were not enough.

"Get the hell back here!" Jones' voice blared in their ears. "You can't
do it. You're 20 miles away now and angling up. Don't be dead heroes!"
The last words were high and frantic.

"We've got to!" Morrow answered. "There's no other way."

"We can't do the impossible, chief," Bert gasped.

A group of tiny figures broke away from the rim of the space station.
The tugmen were coming to help.

Then Kevin grasped the hideous truth. There were not enough rocket
pistols to bring the men to the full ship and return _with any reserve
to guide the projectile_.

"Get back!" he shouted. "Save the pistols. We're coming in."

Behind them their only chance for life continued serenely upward into a
new orbit. There, 900 miles above the earth, it would revolve forever
with more fuel in its tanks than it needed.

Fuel that would have saved the lives of 90 desperate men.

By leaving it, Morrow and Anderson had bought perhaps 30 more minutes
of life before the space station became a huge meteor riding its fiery
path to death in the the upper reaches of the atmosphere.

Both suffered the guilt of enormous betrayal. The fact that they could
have done no more did not erase it.

Frantically, Kevin flipped over in his mind the possible tools that
still could be brought to bear to lift the space station above its
flaming destruction. But his tools were the stone axe of a primitive
man trying to hack his way out of a forest fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eager hands pulled them back into the station. For a moment there
were the reassuring sounds as their helmets were unscrewed. Then the
familiar smells and shape of the structure that had been home for so
long. Now that haven was about to destroy itself.

Then Morrow remembered the Earth rocket that had brought Senator
McKelvie to the great white sausage in space.

That rocket still contained a small quantity of fuel.

If fired at the precise moment, that fuel, anchored with the rocket in
the hub socket, might be enough to lift the entire station.

He shouted instructions and men raced to obey. Kevin, himself, raced
into the nearest tube. There was no sound, but ahead of him the hatch
was open to the discharge chamber. He leaped into the zero gravity room.

McKelvie was crawling through the connecting port into the feeder
rocket. Kevin sprawled headlong into Gordon. The recoil threw them
apart, but Gordon recovered balance first.

He had a gun.

"Get back," he snarled. "We're going down." He laughed sharply, near
hysteria. "We're going down to tell the world how you fried--through
error and mismanagement."

"You messed up those lines," Kevin said. It didn't matter now. He only
hoped to hold Gordon long enough for diversionary help to come out of
the tube.

"Yes," Gordon leered. "We fixed the lines. The senator wasn't sure we
should, but I helped him over his squeamishness, and now we'll crack
the whip when we get back home."

"You won't make it," Kevin said. "We're still more than 600 miles high.
The glide pattern in that rocket is built to take you down from 500
miles."

McKelvie's head appeared in the hatch. He was desperately afraid.

"You said you could fly this thing, Gordon. Can you?"

Max nodded his head rapidly, like a schoolboy asked to recite a lesson
he has not studied.

Kevin was against the bulkhead. Now he pushed himself slowly forward.

"Stay back or I'll shoot?" Gordon screamed. Instead, he leaped backward
through the hatch.

Hampered by his original slow motion, Kevin could not move faster until
he reached another solid surface.

The hatch slammed shut before his grasping fingers touched it.

A wrenching tug jostled the space station structure. The rocket was
gone, and with it the power that might have saved all of them.

Morrow ran again. He had not stopped running since the beginning of
this nightmare.

He tumbled over Bert and Jones in the tube. They scrambled after him
back to the control room. The three men watched through the port.

"If he doesn't hit the atmosphere too quick, too hard ..." Kevin
whispered. His fists were clenched. He felt no malice at this moment.
He did not wish them death. There was no sound in the radio. The
plummeting projectile was a tiny black dot, vanishing below and behind
them.

When the end came, it was a mote of orange red, then a dazzling smear
of white fire as the rocket ripped into the atmosphere at nearly 20,000
miles an hour.

"They're dead!" Jones voice choked with disbelief. Kevin nodded, but it
was a flashing thing that lost meaning for him in the same instant. He
knew that unless a miracle happened, ninety men in his command would
meet the same fate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Like a perpetual motion machine, his brain kept reaching for something
that could save his space station, his own people, the iron-nerved
spacemen who knew they were near death but kept their vital posts,
waiting for him to find a way.

Stories do not end unhappily--that thought kept cluttering his brain--a
muddy optimism blanking out vital things that might be done.

"What's the altitude Jones?"

"520 now. Leveling a bit."

"Enough?" It was a stupid question and Kevin knew it. Jones shook his
head.

"We might be lucky," he said. "We'll hit it about 97 miles up. The top
isn't a smooth surface, it billows and dips. But," he added, almost a
whisper, "we'll penetrate to about 80 miles before...."

"How much time?" Kevin asked sharply. A tiny chain of hope linked
feebly.

"About 22 minutes."

"Bert, order all hands into space suits--emergency!"

While the order was being carried out, Kevin summoned the tugmen.

"How many loaded pistols do we have?"

"Six," the chief answered.

"All right. Get this quick. Anchor yourselves inside the hub. Aim those
pistols at the Earth and fire until they're exhausted."

The chief stared incredulously.

"I know it's crazy," Kevin snapped. "It's not enough, but if it alters
our orbit 50 feet, it'll help." The tugmen ran out. Bert, Kevin and
Jones scrambled into space suits. Morrow called for reports.

"All hands," he intoned steadily, "open all ports. Repeat. Open all
ports. Do not question. Follow directions closely."

Ten seconds later, a whoosh of escaping air signaled obedience.

"Now!" Kevin shouted, "grab every loose object within reach. Throw it
at the Earth. Desks, books, tools, anything. Throw them down with every
ounce of strength you've got!"

It was insane. Everything was insane. It couldn't possibly be
enough.... But space around the hurtling station blossomed with every
conceivable flying object that man has ever taken with him to a lonely
outpost. A pair of shoes went tumbling into darkness, and behind it the
plastic framed photograph of someone's wife and children.

Jones knew his superior had not gone berserk. He bent anxiously over
the radar scope.

It was not a matter of jettisoning weight. Every action has an equal
reaction, and the force each man gave to a thrown object was as
effective in its diminuitive way as the exhaust from a rocket.

"Read it!" Morrow shouted. "Read it!"

"265 miles," Jones cried. "I need more readings to tell if it helped."

There was no sound in the radio circuit, save that of 90 men breathing,
waiting to hear 90 death sentences. Jones' heavily-gloved hands moved
the pencil clumsily over the graph paper. He drew a tangent to a new
curve.

"It helped," he said tonelessly, "We'll go in at 100 miles, penetrate
to 90...."

"Not enough," Kevin said. "Close all ports. Repeat. Close all ports!"

An unheard sigh breathed through the mammoth, complex doughnut as
automatic machinery gave new breath to airless spaces.

It might never be needed again to sustain human life.

But the presence of air delivered one final hope to Morrow's frantic
brain.

"Two three oh miles," Jones said.

"Air control," Kevin barked into the mike, "how much pressure can you
get in 15 minutes?"

"Air control, aye," came the answer, and a pause while the chief
calculated. "About 50 pounds with everything on the line."

"Get it on! And hang on to your hats," Kevin yelled.

The station dropped another 30 miles, slanting in sharply toward the
planet's envelope of gas that could sustain life--or take it away.
Morrow turned to Anderson.

"Bert. There are four tubes leading into the hub. Get men and open
the outer airlocks. Then standby the four inner locks. When I give
the signal, open those locks, fast. You may have to pull to help the
machinery--you'll be fighting three times normal air pressure."

Bert ran out. Nothing now but to wait. Five minutes passed. Ten.

"We're at 135 miles," Jones said. Far below the Earth wheeled by, its
apparent motion exaggerated as the space station swooped lower.

"120 miles."

Kevin's throat was parched, his lips dry. Increasing air pressure
squeezed the space suits tighter around his flesh. A horror of
claustrophobia gripped him and he knew every man was suffering the same
torture.

"110 miles."

"Almost there," Bert breathed, unaware that his words were audible.

Then a new force gripped them, at first the touch of a caressing finger
tip dragging back, ever so slightly. Kevin staggered as inertia tugged
him forward.

"We're in the air!" he shouted. "Bert. Standby the airlocks!"

"Airlocks ready!"

The finger was a hand, now, a huge hand of tenuous gases, pressing,
pressing, but the station still ripped through its death medium at a
staggering 20,000 miles an hour.

Jones pointed. Morrow's eyes followed his indicating finger to the
thermocouple dial.

The dial said 100° F. While he watched it moved to 105, quickly to 110°.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five seconds more. A blinding pain of tension stabbed Kevin behind the
eyes. But through the flashing colors of agony, he counted, slowly,
deliberately....

"Now!" he shouted. "Open airlocks, Bert. NOW!"

Air rushed out through the converging spokes of the great wheel, poured
out under tremendous pressure, into the open cup of the space station
hub, and there the force of three atmospheres spurted into space
through the mammoth improvised rocket nozzle.

Kevin felt the motion. Every man of the crew felt the surge as the
intricate mass of metal and nylon leaped upward.

That was all.

Morrow watched the temperature gauge. It climbed to 135°, to 140° ...
145 ... 150....

"The temperature is at 150 degrees," he announced huskily over the
radio circuit. "If it goes higher, there's nothing we can do."

The needle quivered at 151, moved to 152, and held....

Two minutes, three....

The needle stepped back, one degree.

"We're moving out," Kevin whispered. "We're moving out!"

The cheer, then, was a ringing, deafening roar in the earphones. Jones
thumped Kevin madly on the back and leaped in a grotesque dance of joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morrow leaned back in the control chair, pressed tired fingers to his
temples. He could not remember when he had slept.

The first rocket from White Sands had brought power to adjust the
orbit. This one was on the mark.

The next three brought the Senate investigating committee.

But that didn't matter, really. Kevin was happy, and he was waiting.

The control room door banged open. Mark Kramer's grin was like a flash
of warm sunlight.

"Hi, commander," he said, "wait'll you see the marvelous pictures I
got."

Outside the Moonbeam rode gently at anchor, tethered with new safety
lines.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Slow Burn, by Henry Still

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLOW BURN ***

***** This file should be named 59345.txt or 59345.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/3/4/59345/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

