Project Gutenberg's The American Agriculturist. Vol. II. No. XI, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The American Agriculturist. Vol. II. No. XI
       Designed to Improve the Planter, the Farmer, the
       Stock-breeder, and the Horticulturist

Author: Various

Editor: A.B. Allen

Release Date: May 22, 2019 [EBook #59579]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST. ***




Produced by Alan and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)









                                THE
                        AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST.

                            [Illustration]

   Agriculture is the most healthful, the most useful, and the most
             noble employment of Man.--_Washington._

         VOL. II.      NEW YORK, DECEMBER, 1843.      NO. XI.

         A. B. ALLEN, Editor.      SAXTON & MILES, Publishers,
                                                 205 Broadway.




FATTENING POULTRY.


As Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Years, are fast approaching, when
the demand for poultry is at its greatest height, and the quality of
it is more curiously considered than at other seasons of the year, in
order to obtain something choice for the festive days, we have thought
a few words upon the fattening and preparation of it for market might
now very appropriately be given, and perhaps interest our readers more
than at another time.

The fowls being in good condition a fortnight to one month previous to
the time they are wanted for killing, shut them up in a roomy, dry,
well-ventilated, and warm building, with either a ground, stone, or
plank floor, as is most convenient. This should be cleaned every day,
and straw several inches thick spread over a part of it, especially
where geese and ducks are shut up, for the purpose of giving them
good beds to sit in. As often as the litter gets soiled, remove it,
and put clean straw in its place. A constant supply of food and water
should now be kept before them, allowing the fowls to eat and drink as
often and as much as they please. Gravel is indispensable for their
health, and charcoal, together with a little lime or ground bones, is
beneficial. Fowls fat better when they can get at their food as often
as they please, and are not so apt to gorge themselves and become
surfeited.

For feed we prefer corn mostly; a little wheat, rye, or barley, is
also very well as a change; oats have rather too much husk about
them. In addition to these, boiled potatoes, sweet apples, pumpkins,
and sugar beet, are excellent food, especially when mixed with a due
proportion of mush or hasty pudding. Where sweet potatoes abound, they
are an excellent substitute for the last. To the above, add daily a
little lean meat, that which is cooked is preferred; and the last
week of their fattening, for a finishing process, rice boiled in milk
and sweetened with molasses, is very excellent. This may be called an
expensive method; but our readers may be assured that the fowls will be
enough better to pay for it. Meat derives much of its taste from the
kind and quality of food that the animals consume; hence gross, fatty
substances, fish, or anything that is disagreeable to the taste should
be avoided in the food given to fowls during the fattening process,
as these invariably impart more or less of their disagreeable flavor
to the flesh of the poultry fed upon them. It is well known that the
celebrated canvass-back duck derives its delicacy of taste from feeding
on the bulbous roots of a peculiar grass growing in the Chesapeake
bay, and that other kinds of ducks are scarcely eatable, in consequence
of their living almost entirely upon fish. These remarks will hold good
to most kinds of birds, both of the water and land, and, indeed, of
all animals; accordingly as their food is good or bad, so will be the
quality of the milk, meat, or eggs.

We recollect when a boy, of having occasionally seen geese and ducks
nailed through the webs of their feet to planks and floors, and hens
and turkeys tied up and so closely confined to stakes, that they could
not exercise. This was done so that they might fat the faster! How
shockingly barbarous, and any one guilty of such a practice in these
days, ought to be indicted, and severely punished for their cruelty and
cupidity. We are totally opposed to the close confinement of beast or
bird. Without exercise, the system can not be in a healthy state; and
the meat of close confined animals is never as good, to say the least
of it, as when they have plenty of fresh air, and are allowed to move
moderately about.

The best method of killing fowls, is to cut their heads off at a single
blow with a sharp axe, and then hang them up and allow them to bleed
freely. By this process they never know what hurts them, or endure pain
for a second. Wringing the necks of poultry is almost as shocking as
nailing their feet to planks for the purpose of fattening them, and
follows in the same barbarous category.

Scalding the fowl previous to picking, injures the feathers, and
makes it troublesome to dry them, and we think the quality of flesh
is somewhat injured by this process, especially if the weather be not
pretty cold at the time. They should be picked as soon as possible
after being killed, and their offal taken from them; be clean rinsed
then in cold water, and hung up to dry, and kept as separate as
possible till sold; packing them together in heaps injures the flesh.
To be hung up and frozen for a few days, or even weeks before eating,
makes the flesh more tender. To keep them the same length of time after
roasting, especially if well stuffed, also adds to their delicacy of
taste and tenderness.

When the bird is brought on to the table, it is perfectly shocking to
see its head, legs, and feet, left upon it, though we know in many
places this is fashionable, and considered highly genteel; but for
our own part we detest such offal, and the sight of them frequently
destroys our appetite for the time being. The process of carving also
at the table is a dead bore. We like the French fashion of cutting up
the bird in the kitchen or at a side table, and having it passed round
on the dish, every one then helping himself to such pieces as he likes
best.




FERTILITY OF SEA-MUD.


SEA-MUD varies greatly in its composition, dependant something upon
the soil of the neighboring uplands. It is considered a valuable
manure in Europe, and is sought for with avidity, and transported not
unfrequently considerable distances into the interior. We have seen
it used with good effect in the United States, from Massachusetts to
Pennsylvania; and are told that in Delaware and Maryland, and even
farther south, it is highly prized by those who have tried it. On Long
Island, the past summer, we were occasionally shown the fertilising
results, not only of sea-mud, but of the marsh soil also, applied to
the uplands a little removed from the borders of the marshes and the
seashore. Our intelligent correspondent, Mr. Partridge, informs us he
has used beach-mud in various ways with good effect; and that the past
summer, two gentlemen whose country seats border his mill, were allowed
to make use of the sediment from the tide mill-pond, and they found it
added greatly to the productiveness of their gardens.

Sea-mud may be applied in different ways, according to its
constituents. If it abounds with clay, it should be taken in the fall
of the year, and spread broad-cast upon the land, and thus lie exposed
to the action of the frost all winter. This pulverises it well, and
in the spring of the year the roller should be passed over it in
dry weather, followed by the harrow, and if any lumps remain after
this operation, let them be beaten fine with the dung-beater. This
is considered one of the best top dressings for grass land which can
be given; it also answers well to be plowed in for either grain or
root crops. Where the mud abounds more with sand, it is an excellent
thing to put into barn yards and pig-styes, to be incorporated with
the litter and manure; it may likewise be thrown into a heap until it
becomes completely pulverised, and then spread upon the land.

As air-slacked lime or small broken lime can be obtained in this city
for about half the price of quick lime, Mr. Partridge suggests that
it would be an excellent ingredient to mix with the sea-mud, for
the purpose of forming a compost. A bushel or two of the lime, to a
cart-load of the mud, he thinks a good mixture. When it abounds with
considerable vegetable matter, we would recommend a greater proportion
of lime, say from one to ten or twenty parts. Ashes and charcoal dust
are excellent ingredients to mix with sea-mud, and when either of these
or lime is used to form a compost, they make it much more lasting. It
is less labor to transport the sea-mud directly to the place where it
is to be used, and spread it broad-cast at once upon the land; and as
the saving of labor is quite an object in our country, we have found
that this method of applying it is the most generally practised.

With the exception of a few of our more intelligent farmers, sea-mud
and marsh-mud as fertilizers, are not valued as highly as they ought
to be in the United States. They exist in immense quantities all along
our seaboard, and may be had in an unlimited extent for the mere labor
of transportation. We hope that some experiments may hereafter be made
with them by some of our readers on the different kinds of crops, and
that they will give us the results. The time, we think, is approaching,
when sea-mud and marsh-soil will be as highly prized here as they now
are in Europe.




SKETCHES OF THE WEST.--NO. II.


PLANTATION OF MR. GREY.--One of the best plantations, especially
for its farm-buildings, which we visited in Kentucky, was that of
Mr. Benjamin Grey of Versailles. The house, as is usual in the more
southern states, stands near the centre of the domain on rising ground,
and commands a fine view of the country around. It is in cottage
style, large and roomy, and flanked by thick, strong chimneys, built
up outside of the gable ends. A pretty yard of smooth green-sward,
decked with shrubbery and evergreens, is enclosed around with pointed
white palings, and adjoining this is a noble park, formed by merely
underbrushing and thinning out a few of the trees of the original
forest. These are usually termed wood-land pastures in Kentucky; yet
in most instances, they better deserve the name of park, than many of
those on noblemen's estates in Europe.

CROPS.--Mr. Grey's farm being principally devoted to stock, and what
is rather unusual here, dairy products, the crops are but a secondary
consideration. Hemp is the main one to which he gives his attention;
and in addition to this, he raises a sufficiency of corn and the
smaller grains for his own consumption. The rotation is much like that
described in our first volume, under head of Tours in Kentucky.

STOCK.--This is very fine indeed, Mr. Grey having been highly spirited
in this matter. His Short-Horns are choice, and quite numerous. We
particularly admired the cow Mary Ann, with the calf at her foot. She
has a fashionable and airy form; an up-head, and deer-like action;
handles well, and in addition to all these, we were informed that she
is an excellent milker. Three heifers of her produce we also admired;
the two youngest were strikingly like their dam. After the Short-Horns,
we were shown a few good Cotswold, and South-Down sheep, imported
direct from England by Messrs. Bagg & Wait of Orange Co., in this
state. The stock-hogs are a cross of the Berkshire upon the Thin-Rinds,
(a grade Chinese), and they make excellent porkers.

FARM BUILDINGS.--These are among the most complete we have seen in any
place, and we speak of them with the more pleasure, because they are
blameably deficient in farm buildings throughout the whole southwest.
The climate here, it is true, is warmer and much more open than at the
north; but it is in this _very openness_, that consists the principal
suffering of the stock. The ground during this time is muddy, cold, and
damp; and worse, consequently, for animals to repose upon, than when
frozen dry, or covered with snow. Sudden changes are continually taking
place. Mild weather prevails for a few days, relaxing the system; this
is then followed not unfrequently by intense cold; the thermometer
sinking in 48 hours from 55 deg. or 60 deg. above, to zero, and sometimes 8 deg. to
10 deg. below it. These sudden changes are very injurious to man and beast,
and far more to be dreaded than the steady cold of northern latitudes;
and for this reason, more attention should be paid to the warmth of
their dress on the part of the people here, and to the housing of
stock, than is generally done. It would lessen disease, add to their
longevity, and give a handsomer, fuller, and more healthful physical
appearance. But to return more immediately to our subject.

With the exception of the usually reserved gangway on the barn-floor,
the lower story is devoted to stables. These are planked, and each
animal is accommodated with a separate stall. Behind them is a shallow
gutter, running the whole length of the stable, which conducts the
liquid falling from the animals into a cess-pool in the yard, and is
there absorbed by muck. The solid manure is also equally carefully
saved and applied to the land, and notwithstanding the proverbial
fertility of the soil of Kentucky, Mr. Grey assured us that he
considered himself well paid in the increase of his crops, for the
labor employed in thus saving and applying his manure. Over-head in the
barn are lofts for hay and straw; a straw-cutter to prepare them for
feeding; cribs and bins for grain; and a large square box with heavy
wooden pounders, for the hands to pound up corn and cob into meal on
rainy days, when they can do nothing else. This cob-meal is usually
mixed up with water, and allowed to stand till it ferments, and is then
fed to the stock.

THE DAIRY.--This is a sufficiently roomy building, of one story,
situated in a little dell a short distance from the mansion. One of
the gable ends abuts against a nearly perpendicular cliff, out of
which bursts a clear gurgling spring, that takes its course through
the centre of the rocky floor of the dairy, and then finds its way
into the valley below. Here is every convenience for making butter and
cheese, in which Mr. Grey excels. We have dwelt thus minutely on the
plantation, stock, and buildings of Mr. Grey, because we consider them
an excellent example to follow in Kentucky; and also for the purpose
of giving our northern readers a general idea of the husbandry at the
west, of which the great majority entertain the most indefinite notions
imaginable.

MR. HART'S PLANTATION.--After taking an early dinner, Mr. Grey ordered
up his buggy, and we started for Mr. Nathaniel Hart's. This was some
few miles off, yet in order to get there we paid no attention to the
public roads, but took our way over gentle hill and dale, through
woodland-pastures, and among fields containing a hundred acres or more
in each, under a single fence. For the purpose of opening and shutting
the field-gates as we passed, we were accompanied by an ebony urchin,
as out-rider, mounted on the bare back of a high-spirited gray nag,
which he rode with no little address. This seemed quite a gala business
for him; and bare-headed, with his thick woolly locks fluttering in
the wind, and his shirt-collar wide open, he went grinning along,
now advancing at a hard gallop, and anon closing up at a fast trot,
swinging open and shutting to the gates, shaking his pate, and
hallooing to every animal that he thought did not move with sufficient
alacrity from our destined path.

"Yo! ho! So you no move, Misser Cow--then Pompey make you," and at
her he charged, brandishing a long stick, like a Cossack of the Don
with his spear, the gray nag at the same time laying back his ears,
and opening his mouth, and showing his teeth, as if grinning in fiery
sympathy with his redoubtable rider, and ready to devour the animal
that so sluggishly obstructed the path. But one look from the cow, or
whatever beast it might be, at the horse and boy, seemed quite enough;
and without waiting further hints, they would shake their tails, then
give them a slight curl, and set off at a round scamper, the triumphant
Pompey following up their career a short distance, singing with high
satisfaction:--

  I tell you so, now Misser Cow;
  Yo, ho, you go, bow wow, bow wow.

Mr. Hart's plantation is a very fine one, and he is one of the largest
hemp-growers in Kentucky. He has done much to introduce a system of
water-rotting hemp in ponds, which we think is the best and most simple
of the kind yet tried. He has promised us a description of this, with
his late improvements, and we trust that we shall be favored with it
soon, for the benefit of those desirous of preparing their hemp for
market by the pond-water-rotting process. There is so much in common
with Kentucky plantations, that it is unnecessary to dwell further upon
particulars. Mr. Hart's stock of cattle is principally derived from the
first importation of the Short-Horns into Kentucky, in 1817. He keeps
a flock of about 800 Merino sheep, which, low as wool is, he thinks
make him as good, if not a better return, than anything else which his
plantation produces. Sheep-husbandry is attracting much attention at
present in Kentucky. It is a very superior region indeed, for sheep,
and if the planters would go judiciously into the fine-woolled breeds,
wool would soon become an article of large export with them, and a
source of considerable profit. Let it be remembered, that the cheaper
and better wool can be produced, the more there will be consumed of it;
and the cheaper and better, woollen cloths will be furnished in return.
We need not fear overstocking the country in our generation.

Mr. Hart keeps quite a herd of deer in his park, and several head of
elk. These last, with their large branching horns, and lofty, erect
heads, have a noble appearance. He formerly had a few buffaloes, but
they became so troublesome in breaking down fences, and sallying out
whenever they pleased, to the great terror of the country round,
that he was at last obliged to kill them. Buffalo bulls get somewhat
ferocious as they grow old, and are rather dangerous animals on the
plantation. While in Kentucky, we picked up some comic anecdotes of
their doings as they turned out; but a feather's weight in the other
scale might have made them equally tragical; and upon the whole, unless
enclosed within a fence that they could not break down, we should
advise our friends to eschew keeping buffaloes.




BREEDS OF FOWLS.


IN perusing the American Poultry Book, which we noticed in our October
No., we find the following recommendation for selecting a stock for the
poultry-yard:--

 The better practice would seem to be, in order to make the
 poultry-yard most profitable, to select _no particular breed_.
 Commence with pullets and cocks of the first year, of all the breeds
 mentioned above, except bantams, and without any regard to color
 excepting those of a pure white. It would be well, if possible, to
 select the cocks from the same yard. Every year exchange a nest-full
 of eggs with your neighbors, or such as have good fowls. By pursuing
 steadily this practice of exchanging eggs, you will yearly infuse new
 blood into your stock, and avoid the inconvenience of breeding in and
 in. Without being aware of this fact, many farmers find their stock
 _running out_, &c.

Now the above plan for forming a stock for the poultry-yard we hold
to be perfectly absurd, and one might with just the same propriety,
advise mingling all the different breeds of horses or cattle together,
for the purpose of forming a good stock, as the different varieties
of fowls; and we need only consider for one moment, the incongruity
of the materials which form them, to be convinced of this. There is
the pugnacious Gamecock; the pheasant-shaped Top-knot; the coarse
Malay; the thick-skinned Negro-fowl; the tender Chinese or Merino;
the tailless Rumpless; the Friesland, with reversed feathers; the
short-legged Creeper; the five-toed Dorking; &c., &c.; all thrown
into one helter-skelter mass, the progeny of which would prove as
contemptible a race of mongrels as ever graced a dung-hill, and beyond
the precincts of a dung-hill they would scarcely be worth removing.

Those who have most eminently succeeded in breeding fowls, have
adopted the same course in doing so, which is followed by judicious
breeders of animals; and that is, by sticking to the breed, when it
is a good one, in its utmost purity; choosing the best of the flock
from which to propagate, and thus continuing. In-and-in breeding, to a
certain extent, when pursued by those who thoroughly understand their
business, has been productive of the best results. The finest, the
largest, and the most _indomitable_ game-cocks have thus been bred;
and if we possessed a good breed of poultry of any kind, we should be
very careful how we exchanged eggs with our neighbors for the purpose
of improving them. If they had a superior stock to our own, of the
same breed, we would select from among them grown birds only; we
should then know what we got, and be able to make improvements upon
those we already possessed. It is by mingling all sorts of breeds
together, without any definite notion as to the results, that "many
farmers find their stock _running out_"; and if every one were to
follow this course, we should soon be without a single good fowl in our
poultry-yards. We really regret to see a book like this on American
Poultry, which in the main is a good little work, recommend such a
course of breeding; for in our humble judgment it is the very worst
which could be pursued.

We can not say that we much like the author's advice either, as to the
choice of a cock. Why he should be "restless, not very large, with a
thick and stout bill, long spurs," &c., we can not divine. The best
cocks we ever kept, and those of the most indomitable courage, when
fighting was necessary, were the most quiet, attentive, and polite in
their seraglio: they were also of rather large size for their breed;
with fine heads, bills, feet, and legs.




NEW YORK FARMERS' CLUB.


THE FARMERS' Club resumed their meetings, on Tuesday, Nov. 13th, at the
Repository of the American Institute.

The meeting commenced by reading a communication from the President
of the Manhattan Gas Light Company, David C. Colden, Esq., inviting
the attention of farmers, and all interested in agriculture, to the
value of the refuse of gas-works as manure. Extracts from the works
of Liebig, and Johnston were then read, setting forth the powerful
fertilizing properties of ammoniacal liquor, with which the refuse of
gas-works is found to be strongly impregnated. After some conversation
on the subject, in which Mr. Stevens, Commodore De Kay, Mr. Meigs, and
Mr. Wakeman, took part, as to the best method of disposing of this
communication, it was resolved that it be referred to a committee
consisting of Gen. Tallmadge, Mr. Prince, Gen. Johnson, Col. Clarke,
and Mr. Townsend, to report at the next meeting of the club.

Mr. William R. Prince, of Flushing, presented to the meeting, specimens
of nineteen different varieties of apples, among which were several of
very large size and superior quality.

Mr. Meigs presented seeds of a new variety of squash, the _Cucurbitur
bicolor_.

Mr. Ward, cuttings from a vine which produced ripe Isabella grapes on
the 5th September.

A desultory conversation then ensued as to the future proceedings
of the club. Much diversity of opinion appeared to exist as to the
propriety of holding the meetings weekly, fortnightly, or monthly, when
a committee was appointed to report upon the subject.

Dr. Field next called the attention of the club to a subject which
he considered deserving their serious attention, viz: the present
condition of the children now in the alms-house on Long Island. He
thought they might be employed advantageously to themselves and
the public, either in the cultivation of the mulberry, and general
management of silk, or in horticultural occupations. He then proceeded
to describe with feeling eloquence, their present deplorable condition,
both morally and physically, arising from the system of idleness they
are now allowed to pursue.

He was followed by Mr. Stevens, and Mr. Carter, who both agreed that it
was high time some steps should be taken to ameliorate the condition of
the poor children, and it was finally resolved:

That a committee consisting of Dr. Field, Mr. Stevens, and Mr. Carter,
be appointed to investigate the subject, and petition the corporation
that the pauper children of this city, now on the Long Island farm, be
employed in horticultural pursuits generally, and also in the raising
and manufacture of silk.

Mr. Stevens then made some remarks on the subject of wax-flowers and
fruits, a specimen of which was exhibited by Mr. Lane. Mr. Stevens
thought that a model of every new variety of fruit ought to be taken in
wax, and preserved at the Repository of the Institute.

A motion was made and carried that the executive committee be
instructed to consider the subject.

Gen. Tallmadge suggested that a list of donors of fruits, &c., be
kept by the secretary, and placed on the records of the club at every
meeting, which was unanimously agreed to.

The meeting then adjourned to Tuesday, the 28th November.

The following are the extracts on refuse gas, sent to the club by the
President of the Manhattan Gas-Light Company:--

 "If the properties of manure, and its agency upon the growth of the
 vegetable world, can be explained by chemistry, we shall find the
 ammoniacal liquor produced in gas-works, to be a valuable substitute
 for those manures, by the application of which it is intended to
 supply the soil with nitrogen.

 "One of the most valuable manures is urine, and its excellence
 depends almost entirely upon the ammoniacal salts which it holds in
 solution. The relative value of urine as manure, depends upon the
 quantity of nitrogen the different kinds yield. Thus human urine is
 the most esteemed, and that of horned animals the least."--_Clegg's
 Treatise on Gas-Making._

According to Liebig, 547 pounds of human excrement contain 16.41 pounds
of nitrogen; a quantity sufficient to yield the nitrogen of 800 pounds
of wheat, rye, oats, or of 900 pounds of barley. How much more, then,
will be supplied from an equal weight of ammoniacal liquor!

Mr. J. Watson, the manager of the gas-works at Kirriemuir, has favored
me with the following facts:--

 "The ammoniacal liquor on the surface of the tar-well has been found
 a very great improvement as a manure for raising crops of grass in
 this quarter, by being sprinkled on the field in the same way as
 water is put on public streets in large towns, to keep down dust in
 dry weather. I have myself seen an experiment of this tried, and
 can say that part of a field of grass sprinkled in this way, after
 the first cutting, was far superior to any other part of the field
 receiving manure of any other kind, and that the part so sprinkled, or
 showered over, was ready to be cut down a second time in the course
 of between fourteen days and three weeks; whereas, the other part
 of the field cut at the same time, was only beginning to spring or
 rise from the roots in that time. It must be mixed up before use with
 four parts of common water. In particular, the said experiment of the
 gas-water has been used by David Nairn, Esq., Doumkilba, near Meigle,
 in this neighborhood, with success; and I am informed that he has
 purchased and taken a lease of the ammoniacal liquor from different
 gas-companies in this country.

 "I am convinced much good might be derived from different qualities
 of the refuse products of gas-works as manure. An inquiry into this
 subject would remunerate the engineer or agriculturist to the full,
 and would besides confer a considerable benefit upon his fellows, and
 give that practical proof of the correctness of a theory so welcome to
 the man of science."

 "The fertilizing power of gypsum has been explained by its supposed
 action on the ammonia which is presumed to exist in the atmosphere. If
 this be the true explanation, a substance containing ammonia should
 act _at least_ as energetically. At all events, the action of foldyard
 manure and of putrid urine, is supposed to depend chiefly on the
 ammonia they contain or give off.

 "Now among the substances containing ammonia in large quantity,
 the ammoniacal liquor of the gas-works is one which can easily be
 obtained, and can be applied in a liquid state at very little cost. It
 must be previously diluted with water till its taste and smell become
 scarcely perceptible.

 "I would propose therefore, as a further experiment, that along with
 one or more of the substances above mentioned, the ammoniacal liquor
 of the gas-works should be tried, on a measured portion of ground,
 and, if possible, in the same field.

 "Soot as a manure is supposed to act partly, if not chiefly in
 consequence of the ammonia it contains. In Gloucestershire, it is
 applied to potatoes and to wheat, chiefly to the latter, and with
 great success. In the wolds of Yorkshire it is also applied largely to
 the wheat-crop. In this country it is frequently used on grass land. I
 am not aware that it is extensively used on clover. I am inclined to
 anticipate that the sulphur it contains, in addition to ammonia, would
 render it useful to this plant. At all events comparative experiments
 in the same field with the gypsum and the ammoniacal liquor, are
 likely to lead to interesting results.

 * * * "Of ammoniacal liquor 100 or 200 gallons per acre, according
 to its strength, for this is constantly varying. It must also be
 diluted with so large a quantity of water as will render it perfectly
 tasteless, and is likely to prove most beneficial if laid on at
 several successive periods."--_Johnston's Agricultural Chemistry_,
 part 1.

 "Sal ammoniac is probably too expensive an article to be employed;
 but sulphate of ammonia may be had of the wholesale chemist at a
 price considerably more reasonable, and the ammoniacal liquor of
 the gas-manufactories, through the distillation of coal, is a still
 cheaper commodity."--_Liebig's Agricultural Chemistry._

 "Its efficacy as a manure is vouched for by many who have made trial
 of it upon their land. See a communication by Mr. Paynter on gas-water
 as a manure."--_Journal Royal Ag. Soc._, No. 1.




THE NEXT ANNUAL SHOW OF THE STATE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.


As the annual show of the New York State Agricultural Society is now
sure to bring fifteen to twenty thousand strangers into the place where
it may be held, to pass three or four days there, and spend their
money pretty freely, it has become quite an object with the different
towns situated on the great thoroughfares, to have the exhibitions
within their boundaries as often as possible. Strong movements will
be made for these hereafter; but we trust that the Society will weigh
well the different claims preferred for its favor, and that no other
consideration than the public good, and the spread of its influence,
will have weight in its decisions.

Albany, Syracuse, and Rochester, each having had the advantage of one
of these meetings, other towns now are soliciting the like favor; and
among those which are preferring their claims for the show of 1844,
we understand that Buffalo, Utica, and Poughkeepsie, are the most
prominent. Perhaps as the northern and western parts of the State have
now had the benefit of three of the exhibitions of the Society, it
is no more than fair that some attention be paid to the southern and
eastern portions. We have heard this city named as a very suitable
place for the show of next year, and the only objection we can
anticipate to it is, that it is an extreme end of the State. Granted;
and is not Buffalo the same? Yet, notwithstanding this, we contend that
New York or Buffalo is just as fairly entitled in their turn to one
of the exhibitions of the Society, as Albany, Syracuse, or Rochester.
However, as our own interests might be somewhat served by a meeting of
the State Society in this city, we shall waive advocating its claims
to one for the present, and content ourselves with stating those of
Poughkeepsie.

1. This town is 210 miles by the usual travelled route, northwest from
Montauk Point, the southeast end of the State. This is as great a
distance as from Poughkeepsie to Syracuse, and 41 miles further than
the railroad route, though a circuitous one, from Syracuse to Buffalo;
so that it may fairly be said to be the hither-end of a third-part of
the limits of the State.

2. The population, from Dutchess county, south and east, includes about
one fourth of that of the whole State.

3. Poughkeepsie is easy of access by land or water, and being situated
on the Hudson, hundreds of strangers from the neighboring States,
especially the southern ones, would visit a show here, when they could
hardly be induced to go farther north or west, and as these visiters
are always purchasers to a greater or less extent, it is quite an
object to get them to attend.

4. This town is the capital of one of the oldest, wealthiest, and
most populous counties of the State, and the one whose general system
of agriculture is probably more highly advanced than any other.
Dutchess, and the neighboring counties, have also considerable improved
stock--much more than we had any idea of till our recent excursions in
these parts. Durham, Devon, and Ayrshire cattle abound; superior road
and blood horses; Cotswold, Leicester, South Down, and numerous flocks
of Merino sheep; the products of the dairy; agricultural implements,
and roots, seeds, fruits, flowers, and domestic fabrics.

5. Poughkeepsie is ready at her own expense, to build pens for the
stock, and furnish all other needful accommodation for the Society,
which will be a saving of expense to it of at least $1,000.

Lastly, there is more accumulated wealth in the southern, than other
parts of the State, and the Society, by holding a fair proportion of
its shows in this quarter, will make itself many staunch friends, and
be introduced to thousands, who would otherwise be ignorant of its
great public merits. The Agricultural Society of the State of New York
is looked up to as an example throughout the country, and it should
be careful to avoid even the appearance of being partial or local in
its proceedings. The national societies of Great Britain and Ireland,
adopt the course of holding their shows in, not only the central, but
the extreme parts of the kingdom; and this is one great reason of their
popularity among all classes.




Tour in England. No. 15.


THINKING that our readers had become somewhat satiated with so
much upon foreign matters as have hitherto found place in this
journal, we had desisted for several months past, giving sketches
of the agriculture of England; but having recently received so many
solicitations to continue them, we again take up the subject, and shall
pursue it pretty regularly through the whole of our third volume,
if such seems to be the pleasure of a majority of our subscribers.
Perhaps, to these, we may also add sketches of some things we saw in
Russia, the recollections of which are very pleasant, at least to us,
yet whether we shall make them equally so in relating them to others,
remains to be seen.

CHATSWORTH, SEAT OF THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE.--In returning from
Yorkshire to London on the North Midland railroad, we stopped at
the Chesterfield station, for the purpose of making an excursion to
Chatsworth, to view the celebrated gardens and immense conservatory of
this superb place. It was a raw morning in August, and as we jumped
from a confined seat in the rail-coach, we were glad to be on our feet
once more, and have an opportunity of rousing our blood by a smart walk
from the station into the town. We stopped at the Angel inn, took a
hearty breakfast, and while waiting a gig being made ready to convey us
to Chatsworth, stepped out for a stroll over the place. Chesterfield
is a dingy old town, of about 6,000 inhabitants, and has little to
recommend it to the notice of strangers, save the spire of All Saints'
Church. This rises to the height of 230 feet, is curiously channeled,
and covered with lead, and is so much out of perpendicular, as to
attract marked attention in passing it, even when at a considerable
distance. It being market-day, the town was thronged with farmers from
the country, exposing stock and agricultural products in the square
for sale. There was little in these, however, deserving particular
attention, and after giving them a hasty look, we returned to the inn.
As we came up, a dapper waiter announced the "oss and gig as _h_all
ready;" when in we jumped, and set out for Chatsworth at a round pace,
distant, if we recollect right, about 8 miles.

Derbyshire possesses the wildest and most broken scenery of any county
in England, and after passing over the flat surface of Yorkshire, it
was quite a relief to find ourselves trotting up and down along a road
winding picturesquely around high hills, and over deep narrow dales. An
hour's drive or so, brought us to the pretty little village of Edensor,
close by the inn of which, is the entrance to Chatsworth. The village
is situated within the park, and is the property of the Duke, and
certainly it is the most charming one we ever saw. Every cottage is of
stone, and no two alike in their architecture. One is a mimic Gothic
castle; another a cottage ornee; a third in the Elizabethan, a fourth
in the Swiss, and perhaps a fifth in the Tudor style. Everything then
was so complete about them--the pretty gardens full of flowers--the
hedges so neatly trimmed--the yards, laid down with the greenest and
softest of turf, and the shrubbery so tastefully planted! These were
the residences of the laborers on the estate, the possession of which
any one might envy them, and desire to be able to call his home.
Attached to the village is a fine old church, and around it an ample
yard, handsomely walled in with strong mason-work. Altogether, this
village is quite a gem in its way, and we were going to add, an epitome
of its owner's heart; for on all his estates, whether in England or
Ireland, the Duke of Devonshire has made it a point to protect and
bountifully provide for his people. There is no want, or suffering, or
seeking the poor-house, by the tenantry, allowed by this kind-hearted,
benevolent man.

Turning from Edensor, and ascending a mound-like hill to the left of
the carriage-road, the palace and the grounds of Chatsworth appear to
the greatest advantage. Immediately below is the river Derwent, tracing
its sparkling course through a rich vale, where were perhaps 1,500 deer
browsing or taking their gambols. A handsome stone bridge spans the
river, and just beyond, the ground rises in terraces to a narrow plain,
where stand the noble palace, with its out-buildings, and the immense
conservatory, in magnificent grandeur. Back of these rises a lofty
hill, the steep sides of which are thickly planted with forest-trees,
and the summit is crowned with a high tower of octagonal shape, built
of stone. We were received at the palace-gate by a servant in handsome
livery, and passing into the gallery of the court, a fine hearty girl
made her appearance to conduct us over the building. The front of the
palace is 350 feet, and one of the side wings about 400 feet long, and
this whole area contains a series of apartments called the drawing-room
suite. An entire number of this paper would hardly suffice to give
the reader a complete description of these magnificent rooms, and the
treasures of art they contain, we therefore pass them over in silence.
From these we strolled into the orangery, which is about 30 feet wide,
and 200 feet long. It is full of beautiful exotics, and among them
were several specimens of the Rhododendron Arboreum, which bore, the
preceding summer, over 2,000 flowers. We now walked out to the lawn
in front of the palace, where one of the under-gardeners appeared
to conduct us over the grounds. These are extremely beautiful, with
walled terraces in the Italian style, and fountains. One jet d'eau
throws up a column 90 feet high. But the great show here in the way
of water-works, is the cascade. It is entirely artificial, and must
have been made at a great expense. The water rushes out from a series
of lakes on top of the hill, and comes pouring down its side, taking
a leap of about 80 feet from one of the arches, and then falls for a
length of 300 yards over a series of 24 ledges, and disappears amidst
masses of rock, on the edge of the lawn. Here it finds a subterranean
passage to the river Derwent. These water-works are looked upon by some
critics with affected contempt; not so with us, however, we greatly
admired them in their way; and yet we have seen Niagara a thousand
times, and had a peep at most of the other water-falls worth looking
at in the United States. We have no sympathy with such hypercritics
as profess a distaste to the cascade at Chatsworth: as a work of art,
it is a magnificent thing, and to our eye, in keeping with the palace
and grounds; and we viewed it with interest. A bronze tree a little
farther on, excited still greater curiosity with us than the cascade,
for it was made to act the part of a fountain, by throwing water from a
thousand sprigs and leaves all around in a shower of spray.

But leaving this and the exquisite scenery of the lawn, we passed on by
a winding carriage-road to a short distance to the conservatory. This
was 350 feet long, 150 feet wide, and nearly 70 feet high; and when
fully completed, is to have an additional length of 150 feet. The roof
is an arch, and is covered with plate glass of the best kind, and so
thick as to resist the heaviest hail. It is heated by iron tubes of hot
water, and to these are added others for cold water, and the whole,
if stretched out to a single length, we were informed would extend
nearly six miles. The plants and trees here are distributed in open
borders, each class being placed in the soil most proper for it, and
the temperature so regulated as to suit their natural state as nearly
as possible. Not far from the centre is an immense rockery rising about
50 feet high, and from the fissures of the thick slabs of stone that
compose it, the cactus and other plants grow out as in their natural
state. Half way up this huge precipice is a little lake with islets,
and in this, water-lilies and other aquatic plants of the rarest and
most beautiful kinds. A wild goat path leads to the top of the rockery,
and beneath it is a wide, deep cave. The variety of shrubs and plants
in this immense conservatory is very great; some of the trees already
reach nearly to the top of the roof, and others presented dimensions
gigantic in the extreme for those within a green-house. There are wide
folding-doors at each end of the conservatory, and any time he pleases,
the Duke can have a drive with his coach and four horses through it.
Taking it altogether, it is by far the most magnificent thing of the
kind we have ever seen. The whole cost of it is not less than half
a million of dollars, which is but a little over the present annual
income of its wealthy possessor.

After leaving the conservatory, we took a zig-zag road, and ascended
through the forest to the crown of the hill by the octagonal tower.
A peasant family was residing here, who permitted us to ascend it to
the top. The view from this is no less extensive than beautiful, of
Chatsworth and the wild broken country around. Descending from this
high perch we had quite a chat with the peasant's wife. She informed
us that the tower was built by a predecessor of the present Duke, for
the purpose of giving the ladies at the palace an opportunity of seeing
the fox-hunting which formerly took place at Chatsworth. Upon taking
leave, the good woman directed a little rosy-faced daughter to show
us the lakes on the hill, the sources of the cascade and fountains
below. After something of a stroll through the woods, we found two
large expanses of water belted in by thick rows of the larch and fir,
and apparently as isolated as if in a wild forest of our own country.
The white swan and the black are kept here, and most other kinds of
curious water-fowl. Our pretty guide answered all our inquiries with
intelligence, and at parting we gave her a small guerdon, for which she
returned a grateful "thank'e zur" and a low courtesy, and then, with
the lightness of a young fawn, skipped into the woods, and immediately
disappeared. Descending the hill toward the palace we came to the
stables. These are very extensive, of quadrangular shape, and large
courtyards within. At a distance, with their imposing architecture,
they might almost pass for the palace itself.

We now bent our steps to the house of the celebrated Mr. Paxton, the
head gardener of the Duke of Devonshire, editor of the Magazine of
Botany which bears his name, and one of the first botanists of England.
His residence is within the park, about a quarter of a mile from the
palace, and is a roomy, beautiful cottage, completely enveloped in
flowers and flowering shrubbery, with a handsome little conservatory at
the end. Much to our regret, he was not at home; but a sub-gardener,
quite an intelligent man, volunteered to show us the gardens. They
occupy 12 acres, and are enclosed by a thick, brick wall, about twelve
feet high. Here are the experimental and kitchen gardens, and hundreds
of fruit-bearing espaliers, trained up the walls. In addition to these
there are forcing pits in abundance, and upward of 20 hot-houses, about
300 feet long each, devoted to different purposes, one of the most
extensive of which is the growing of pine apples. All these things may
be considered very extravagant, but in supporting them, the Duke of
Devonshire has done much for the cause of science, and has conferred a
lasting benefit on his country.

We left Chatsworth with regret; the day we spent there we would have
gladly prolonged to a week, and then we should have gained but an
imperfect knowledge of the treasures of nature and art which are stored
up here for the admiration of thousands of visiters. Mary Queen of
Scots was some time a prisoner here; so also was Marshal Tallard, who
was captured at the battle of Blenheim. What were the thoughts of the
beautiful Queen upon taking leave of it, history does not record; but
the Marshal, no less gracefully than happily, said: "When I return to
France and reckon up the days of my captivity in England, I shall leave
out all those I have spent at Chatsworth." And so thought we, pausing
on the mound-like hill again, as we retraced our steps to Edensor, and
cast a last lingering look upon the park, and palace, and forest hills
in the background, lit up by the clear, glorious sun just sinking
beneath the horizon.




AGRICULTURAL SHOWS.


THE PHILADELPHIA SOCIETY held its annual show at the Lamb tavern,
October 4, 5, and 6. The Germantown Telegraph states, in the _Report
of the Committee of Arrangements_, that the display of horses was
unusually attractive, exhibiting the various breeds for the turf, road,
and farm, in considerable numbers. The Durham cattle seem at last to be
getting the better of prejudice in that quarter, and in their superior
forms and deep milking qualities, have shamed nearly everything else
from the ground, save a few fine Devons and capital grade Durham
milkers. Of sheep and swine, there were very few present, which is
the more to be regretted, as these animals exist in considerable
numbers and of superior breeds throughout the neighboring counties
of Montgomery, Delaware, Chester, and Lancaster. Of Agricultural
Implements and Products there was a good show, and the Plowing-Match
proved an interesting affair. Peter A. Browne, Esq., delivered the
address, which we find at length in the Farmers' Cabinet. Among
other things, he contends no less strenuously than justly for the
establishment of Agricultural schools and Professorships. From another
part of the address we subjoin a few suggestions.

 First, then, it is feared that our agricultural friends have not yet
 paid _all_ the attention that the subject demands, to a judicious
 rotation of crops, adapted to our climate; particularly in regard to
 _roots_.

 Second. Much has been done, that is beyond all praise, in insuring the
 best breeds of cattle. While we hear pronounced with gratitude, the
 names of Mease, Powell, Brantz, Clay, Gowen, and Kelley, let us not
 forget that the task is not finished.

 Third. Soiling, it is apprehended, has been too much neglected by most
 American husbandmen.

 Fourth. Irrigation has also been too little attended to in the United
 States.

 Fifth. Proper care and precaution have not been sufficiently bestowed
 upon the selection of seeds. This is a subject of the greatest
 importance.

 Sixth. Much is yet to be learned in regard to the preservation and
 economical use of manure.

 Seventh. The introduction, more generally, of labor-saving machinery,
 and particularly of the itinerant thrashing-machine, deserves to be
 mentioned.

 Eighth. Gardening and raising fruit are much neglected by our farmers.

 It is respectfully suggested that special committees might, with
 advantage, be raised upon these and other useful topics, to report at
 the next annual meeting.

 Pennsylvania contains nearly thirty millions of acres. According to
 the census of 1840, she had a population of one million seven hundred
 and odd thousands, which is nineteen acres and a fraction for each
 inhabitant. In 1842, she raised, of grains of all kinds, upward of
 sixty millions of bushels; of potatoes, nearly thirteen millions of
 bushels; of hay, upward of two millions and a quarter of tons; of flax
 and hemp, upward of three thousand three hundred tons; of tobacco,
 four hundred and eighty thousand tons; of silk, upward of twenty-one
 thousand pounds; of sugar, nearly three millions and a half of pounds;
 and of wines, nearly eighteen thousand gallons.

THE HENRICO SOCIETY held its third annual show at Richmond, Virginia,
November 1st. The proceedings are published in the Richmond Enquirer.
The Executive Committee reports, that although there is a falling off
in its receipts, there is an increased interest and attention to its
proceedings by the planters. Mr. C. T. Botts, Editor of the Southern
Planter, made the address, from which we subjoin an extract.

 This society was organized and has been chiefly supported by a few
 public-spirited gentlemen in the neighborhood. Its beneficial effects
 are felt and seen by all of you. To form a proper appreciation of
 them, you have only to ride in any direction about the suburbs of the
 city. Rude grounds have been converted into productive gardens, and
 barren wastes into smiling fields. I recollect a lady's saying to me
 last summer, that she meant to make her husband become a member of
 this society, because it had done so much to beautify the rides and
 walks about the city. She declared the time had been when it gave her
 a fit of the horrors, (she was a nervous lady,) to order her carriage
 for an evening drive; but that now, there was nothing that she and her
 children enjoyed so much. But this is not all. Let him who has been
 familiar with your market for the last eight or ten years, compare its
 present abundant supplies of the finest fruits and vegetables, with
 the meager exhibition of former days; and, after all, let us be as
 sentimental as we will, a good market plays a very important part in
 the comedy of human happiness. Our merchants and mechanics too should
 remember, that these exhibitions are annually becoming more and more
 attractive, and that they are by no means inefficient in increasing
 the trade of the city. But, over and above all considerations of
 dollars and cents, let us, one and all, come forward and enrol our
 names as members of this association, which represents the great
 agricultural interest of the state, and which should be the pride and
 ornament of its metropolis.

LAKE COUNTY SOCIETY.--The show of this society took place at Medina,
Ohio, and a complete account of its proceedings may be found in the
Painsville Telegraph. In addition to the usual show of stock, &c., an
extensive procession was got up of wagons and carriages, preceded by
bands of music. One of these held no less than 35 ladies, engaged in
the laudable occupations of knitting, sewing, spinning, and various
other domestic employments. We wish we could chronicle more such
industrial displays, for we consider them an excellent feature in
agricultural shows.

BOURBON COUNTY SOCIETY OF KENTUCKY.--We learn from the Paris Citizen,
that the Eighth Annual show of this Society took place near Paris,
and continued three days, and is said to be the largest and most
varied ever held in Kentucky. The first two days were devoted to the
exhibition of domestic animals, agricultural products, and farming
implements; the third day, to that of domestic manufactures. The
show of horses present was considered very superior; they were of
all varieties, from the mettlesome thorough-bred, to the enormous
cart-horse. The Durhams and other horned stock were well represented,
and gave evidence in their splendid proportions of the superiority of
Kentucky pastures. The descendants are said to be an improvement over
the original importations from England. Mr. Clay was present, and had a
superb pair of blankets presented him by Mrs. James Hutchcraft. These
were made from the wool of Leicester sheep, and were of uncommon size
and thickness, weighing 23 lbs. the pair. On the presentation of these
blankets, Mr. Clay was addressed by the Hon. Garrett Davis, M. C., and
he replied in his usual elegant and happy manner.

HAMPSHIRE, HAMPDEN, AND FRANKLIN SOCIETY, MASSACHUSETTS.--The united
show for the three wealthy and populous counties above, came off at
the beautiful town of Northampton, on the 18th and 19th October,
and we much regret on more accounts than one, that we could not, be
present. The Boston Cultivator furnishes a full report. A large number
of working-oxen of course were present, and to these were added some
superb fat oxen, exhibited by Mr. Sumner Chapin. The committee who
reported upon this subject, attributes the superiority of the cattle
to the large infusion of Short-Horn blood in their veins, and hence
their fine symmetry, light offal, and increased weight of flesh on the
more valuable parts, as compared with native stock when fattened for
the shambles. Mr. Paoli Lathrop exhibited some choice Short-Horns. Of
native cows the committee thus speak:--

 Of the ten cows entered for the premium as _native_ animals, nearly
 or all have an intermixture of Short-Horn or other foreign blood. We
 awarded to Mr. Minor Hitchcock the first premium in this class. In
 his written statement to us it appears that her average product in
 milk for the six months, ending 1st October, was 49 lbs. per day,
 and in the months of June and July, 58 lbs. per day. In butter, her
 average product in the same time was more than 11 lbs. per week,
 and in the month of July alone, nearly 14 lbs. per week; yet in the
 same time he used the necessary milk and cream for his family of
 four persons. Your committee have entire confidence in the statement
 of Mr. Hitchcock; yet it is proper here to remark, that from his
 account of her, and though awarded, a premium as a native animal, she
 partakes highly of the blood of the Short-Horns. In the two classes of
 animals entered as of _native and foreign origin_ it is obvious that
 a proper discrimination was not made; for in some of the former there
 is evidently more of the blood of distinct imported races than the
 latter. Yet your committee deemed it their duty to award the premiums
 of the society to the two classes as they found them.

Now here it is, most everywhere that our native cows are found
excelling as milkers, we can trace a portion of their blood, (usually
the greatest share,) to the Durhams, and yet there are those who are
constantly decrying the Short-Horns for not being _milkers_. Verily
a few particular people are very hard to be convinced. It is our
intention hereafter to make up a table of the milking qualities of the
Short-Horns and their grades, and any one possessing information upon
this subject, we shall be glad by their communicating the same to us.
Mr. Paoli Lathrop of South Hadley took the first premiums on Durham
bulls and heifers. Mr. Ira Fenton of Belchertown on Durham cows. Mr.
Sumner Chapin of Springfield, the first premiums on Fat Cattle and
Working-Oxen.




SALE OF RAMBOUILLET MERINOS.


--Mr. Nathaniel Hart, Jr., of Kentucky, has just passed through this
city on his way home, having in company with him three Rambouillet
Merino bucks, purchased of Mr. D. C. Collins of Hartford, Connecticut.
Mr. Hart has kept a large flock of the old-fashioned Merinos for
some time, on his plantation at Versailles, Woodford county, and has
purchased these fine bucks, as the best animals which could be found,
for the purpose of making improvements upon them. Kentucky will have
in these Rambouillets a valuable addition to her sheep stock, and we
recommend their produce in advance, to the breeders of the western
country. We understand Mr. Collins has recently met with a great demand
for his sheep, and that he has now disposed of all he has to spare this
year. We congratulate him upon it, and take some credit to ourselves,
for calling public attention to his very valuable imported flock.




SHEEP-DOGS.


--The price of a well-broke sheep-dog is $25 to $30. They ought always
to be accompanied by their shepherds, as they are taught to manage
sheep in a peculiar way, which none but regularly-bred shepherds
understand.




ANNUAL MEETING OF THE N. Y. STATE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.

--The annual meeting of the New York State Agricultural Society, will
be held at the Society's room in the Old State Hall, Albany, on the 3d
Wednesday, (the 17th,) of January, 1844, at 10 o'clock, A. M.

Persons intending to compete for the Society's premiums on field-crops,
essays, &c., are reminded that their statements and essays must be sent
to the Recording Secretary, Albany, before the first of January.

Presidents of County Agricultural Societies are also requested to
transmit the reports required by the statute, to the Recording
Secretary, previous to the annual meeting.

  LUTHER TUCKER, Rec. Sec'y.




LIST OF PREMIUMS

_Of the American Institute._--_Continued_.


FLOWERS.

William Kent, Brooklyn, L. I., for superior dahlias, including some
extra-fine American seedlings--gold medal.

George C. Thorburn, 15 John street, N. Y., for a rich display of
dahlias--gold medal.

Daniel Boll, Bloomingdale, N. Y., for a fine assortment of dahlias,
including some fine American seedlings--silver medal.

Thomas Hogg & Sons, 79th street, N. Y., for a good assortment of
dahlias--Mrs. Loudon's Flower Garden.

William R. Prince, Flushing, L. I., for numerous varieties of
dahlias--Downing's Rural Architecture.

Thomas Addis Emmet, Mount Vernon, N. Y.--T. Cremmins, gardener--for a
superior display of dahlias--Downing's Cottage Architecture.

William Phelan & Sons, 5th street, N. Y., for a fine display of
dahlias--Hovey's Magazine.

William Reid, 34th street and 4th avenue, N. Y., for an excellent
assortment of dahlias--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

William Laird, 17th street, N. Y., for an ornamental frame, decorated
with flowers--Hovey's Magazine.

James L. L. F. Warren, Brighton, Mass., for a beautiful bouquet of
flowers--silver medal.

Mrs. Jeremiah Brown, Brooklyn, L. I., for a beautiful vase of
flowers--Mrs. Loudon's Flower Garden.

J. B. Mantel, 46th street, N. Y., for an ornamental frame, decorated
with flowers--American Flower-Garden Directory.

Daniel Boll, Bloomingdale, N. Y., for numerous varieties of the rose,
and other rare flowers--Mrs. Loudon's Flower Garden.

Samuel M. Cox, Bloomingdale road, N. Y., for a beautiful stand of
flowers--American Flower-Garden Directory.

William Beekman, 110 Ninth street, N. Y., for a fine supply of
dahlias--Hovey's Magazine.

Isaac Buchanan, 29th street, N. Y., for two vases of rare flowers--1
Vol. of American Agriculturist.

To Alfred Bridgeman, J. Boyce, A. P. Cummings, William Davison, J.
Ettringham, William V. Legget, Mrs. McFarlane, George Maine, William
Ross, Samuel Ruth, Grant Thorburn, Jr., L. Van Wyck, Edward White, and
John W. Wood, for supplies of flowers for ornamenting the Horticultural
room, to each a copy of the Report of the American Institute, on the
subject of Agriculture.


VEGETABLES.

Robert L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., N. Y., for the choicest assortment
of culinary vegetables--silver medal.

John Beekman, 61st street, N. Y., for the best and greatest variety of
vegetable roots for cattle--silver medal.

Joseph Clowes, Harsimus, N. J., for twelve superior blood beets--United
States Farmer.

Robert L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., N. Y., for twelve superior sugar
beets--1 vol. American Agriculturist.

John Beekman, 61st street, N. Y., for twelve superior mangel-wurtzel
beets--1 vol. of the Cultivator.

Christopher Allen, Staten Island, N. Y., for six fine heads of
cauliflower--Buel's Farmers' Companion.

Peter Hulst, gardener to Lambert Wyckoff, Bushwick, L. I., for the best
field of cabbage--silver medal.

L. Wyckoff, Bushwick, for twelve large heads of the drum-head
cabbage--Transactions of the State Agricultural Society.

Thomas Bridgeman, Jr., Dutch Kills, L. I., for twelve fine heads of
Savoy cabbage--Faulkner's Farmers' Manual.

Thomas Prosser, Paterson, N. J., for twelve superior carrots for the
table--United States Farmer.

J. Clowes, Harsimus, N. J. for twelve fine roots of white
celery--Transactions of State Agricultural Society.

Frederick Bonnicamp, Harsimus, N. J., for twelve fine roots of red
celery--Dana's Muck Manual.

Robert L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., N. Y., for six large
egg-plants--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

John Brill, Jersey city, N. J., for a peck of superior yellow
onions--Faulkner's Farmers' Manual.

William Ross, Ravenswood, Queens co., N. Y., for a peck of superior red
onions--Smith's Productive Farming.

Joseph Clowes, Harsimus, N. J., for twelve fine parsneps for the
table--American Agriculturist.

J. Beekman, 61st street, N. Y., for twelve large parsneps for
cattle--United States Farmer.

Alexander Walsh, Lansingburgh, for superior seedling
potatoes--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

T. B. Wakeman, Bergen, N. J., for superior Mercer potatoes--silver
medal.

William J. Townsend, Newtown, Queens co., for a superior lot of table
potatoes--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

S. B. Townsend, Newtown, L. I., for three large cattle pumpkins--Buel's
Farmers' Companion.

R. L. Colt, Paterson, N. J., for a peck of superior potatoes for
cattle--1 vol. of Cultivator.

John P. Haff, Yorkville, N. Y., for a peck of superior white flat
turneps--1 vol. of Cultivator.

Peter Wyckoff, Bushwick, Kings co., for twelve superior roots of long
white turneps--Bridgeman's Gardener's Assistant.

S. Pabor, Harlem, N. Y., for superior cream pumpkins--Smith's
Productive Farming.

F. O. Wakeman, Bergen, N. J., for twelve superior roots of
salsify--American Agriculturist.

John Brill, Harsimus, N. J., for three fine winter squashes--Faulkner's
Farmers' Manual.

John A. Miller, Little Falls, N. J., for a fine large Valparaiso
squash--Dana's Muck Manual.

H. W. Tibbets, Yonkers, N. Y., for half a peck of large
tomatoes--United States Farmer.

Robert L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., for a fine sample of hops--American
Agriculturist.

Robert L. Pell, Pelham, N. Y., for superior specimens of sweet
potatoes--diploma.

P. Hegone, 206 Greenwich street, for superior specimens of pickles and
catsup--diploma.


FRUITS.

R. L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., N. Y., for the best fruit farm--gold
medal.

R. T. Underhill, Croton Point, N. Y., for successful vineyard-culture
of the native grape--silver medal.

J. L. L. F. Warren, Brighton, Mass., for twelve superior table
apples--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

R. L. Pell, Pelham, Ulster co., N. Y., for twelve superior winter
apples--Kenrick's American Orchardist.

T. H. Perkins, Brookline, Mass., for twelve superior varieties of
house-grapes--gold medal.

R. S. Field, Princeton, N. J., for three superior varieties of
house-grapes--silver medal.

J. F. Allen, Salem, Mass., for six varieties of superior
house-grapes--Downing's Cottage Architecture.

Rev. Dr. Wm. Patton, 110 Sullivan street, N. Y., for fifty-two superior
bunches of Isabella grapes--Downing's Rural Architecture.

R. T. Underhill, Croton Point, N. Y., for superior specimens of Catawba
grapes--Kenrick's American Orchardist.

J. L. L. F. Warren, Brighton, Mass., for twelve superior peaches
(freestone)--Kenrick's American Orchardist.

John J. Van Wyck, 140 Twenty-first street, N. Y., for twelve superior
peaches (clingstones)--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

M. P. Wilder, Dorchester, Mass., for sixty-five choice varieties of
pears--silver medal.

George C. DeKay, 25th street, Seventh avenue, N. Y., for a superior lot
of table pears--Kenrick's American Orchardist.

D. Henderson, Jersey City, N. J., for twelve fine magnum-bonum
plums--Buel's Farmers' Companion.

C. M. Graham, Jr., Content, Harlem lane, N. Y., for fifty-five quinces
gathered from one tree--Kenrick's American Orchardist.

Jacob Hendrer, Glenham, Dutchess co., N. Y., for fine specimens of
grapes--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

J. W. Hayes, Newark, N. J., for a lot of grapes and fine
pears--Farmers' Companion.

John Couzens, Dobb's Ferry, Westchester co., N. Y., for superior
specimen of grapes--United States Farmer.

Wm. R. Prince, Flushing, L. I., for two bunches of native grapes, and
fine specimen of apples--Hovey's Magazine.

William Reid, 37th street, 4th avenue, for a fine collection of pears
and apples--American Agriculturist.

Charles M. Graham, Jr., Content, Harlem lane, for a fine lot of
Isabella grapes--Transactions of State Agricultural Society.

J. J. Morris, Batavia, N. Y., for fine specimen of pears--Farmers'
Manual.

Nicholas Wyckoff, Jr., Bushwick, for fine specimens Isabella
grapes--The Planters' Guide.

J. B. Mantel, 46th street, N. Y., for 53 varieties of pears and other
fruit--two vols. of the Transactions of the State Agricultural Society.

Joseph L. Franklin, Flushing, L. I., for twelve extra large
apples--Dana's Muck Manual.

H. & L. Hotchkiss, New Haven, Conn., for one pear weighing 33 oz.--1
vol. of the Cultivator.

Samuel Walker, Roxbury, Mass., for superior varieties of pears--silver
medal.

Henry Steel, Jersey City, N. J., for a lot of extra-fine early
grapes--Bridgeman's Gardeners' Assistant.

Miss Louisa Bennett, L. I., for a basket of native
strawberries--Bridgeman's Florist's Guide.




MAKING CAPONS.


THE following article on making capons, is the best within our
recollection. It is taken from the directions accompanying the sets of
instruments for caponising, made by Mr. John Mendenhall, Philadelphia:--

 FOWLS intended to be cut, must be kept at least twenty-four hours
 without food, otherwise the entrails will fill the cavity of the belly
 and render it almost impossible to complete the operation; besides,
 when they have been starved the proper length of time, they are less
 liable to bleed.

 The chicken is taken at any age, from five days old until it begins
 to crow, or even after. Lay the fowl on its left side on the floor,
 draw the wings back, and keep it firm by resting the right foot on its
 legs, and the other foot or knee on its wings. (The table with the
 apparatus does away with the necessity of this stooping position.) Be
 careful that the head of the fowl is not held down, or even touched
 during the operation, as it would be sure to cause it to bleed. Pluck
 the feathers off from its right side near the hip joint, in a line
 between that and the shoulder joint; the space uncovered should be a
 little more than an inch square. Make an incision between the two last
 ribs, having first drawn the skin of the part backward, so that when
 left to itself it will cover the wound in the flesh. In some fowls the
 thigh is so far forward that it covers the two last ribs; in which
 case, care must be taken to draw the flesh of the thigh well back, so
 as not to cut through it, or else it would lame the fowl, and perhaps
 cause its death in a few days after the operation, by inflaming.

 The ribs are to be kept open by the hooks--the opening must be
 enlarged each way by the knife, if necessary, until the testicles,
 which are attached to the back bone, are entirely exposed to view,
 together with the intestines in contact with them. The testicles are
 enclosed in a thin skin, connecting them with the back and sides--this
 must be laid hold of with the pliers, and then torn away with the
 pointed instrument; doing it first on the upper testicle, then on the
 lower. (The lower testicle will generally be found a little behind the
 other--that is, a little nearer the rump.) Next introduce the loop;
 (which is made of a horse-hair or a fibre of cocoa-nut;) it must be
 put round the testicle which is uppermost, in doing which the spoon is
 serviceable to raise up the testicle and push the loop under it, so
 that it shall be brought to act upon the part which holds the testicle
 to the back; then tear it off by pushing the tube toward the rump of
 the fowl, at the same time drawing the loop. Then scoop it and the
 blood out with the spoon, and perform the same operation on the other
 testicle. Take away the hooks, draw the skin over and close the wound;
 stick the feathers that you pulled off before on the wound, and let
 the bird go.

 REMARKS.--If the operation be performed without sufficient skill, many
 of the fowls will prove not to be capons; these may be killed for use
 as soon as the head begins to grow large and get red, and they begin
 to chase the hens. The real capon will make itself known by the head
 remaining small, and the comb small and withered; the feathers of the
 neck or mane will also get longer, and the tail will be handsomer and
 longer: they should be kept to the age of fifteen or eighteen months,
 which will bring them in the spring and summer, when poultry is scarce
 and brings a high price. Take care, however, not to kill them near
 moulting time, as all poultry then is very inferior. The operation
 fails, principally, by bursting the testicle, so that the skin which
 encloses the soft matter, remains in the bird, and the testicle grows
 again.

 Birds of five or six months are less liable to have the testicles
 burst in the operation than younger fowls, but they are also more apt
 to bleed to death than those of from two to four months old.

 A skilful operator will always choose fowls of from two to three
 months;--he will prefer also, to take off the lower testicle first, as
 then the blood will not prevent him from proceeding with the other;
 whereas, when the upper one is taken off the first, if there should be
 any bleeding, he has to wait before he can take off the lower testicle.

 The large vein that supplies the entrails with blood passes in the
 neighborhood of the testicles; there is danger that a young beginner
 may pierce it with the pointed instrument in taking off the skin of
 the lower testicle, in which case the chicken would die instantly,
 for all the blood in its body would issue out. There are one or two
 smaller veins which must be avoided, which is very easy, as they are
 not difficult to see. If properly managed, no blood ever appears until
 a testicle is taken off: so that should any appear before that, the
 operator will know that he has done something wrong.

 If a chicken die, it is during the operation by bleeding; (of course
 it is as proper for use as if bled to death by having its throat cut;)
 they very seldom die after, unless they have received some internal
 injury, or the flesh of the thigh has been cut through, from not being
 drawn back from off the last two ribs, where the incision is made; all
 of which are apt to be the case with young practitioners.

 If the testicles be found to be large, the bamboo tube should be used,
 and it should have a strong cocoa-nut string in it,--for small ones
 the silver tube with a horse-hair in it, is best.

 When a chicken has been cut, it is necessary before letting it run,
 to put a permanent mark upon it; otherwise it would be impossible to
 distinguish it from others not cut. I have been accustomed to cut off
 the outside or the inside toe of the left foot,--by this means I can
 distinguish them at a distance. Another mode is to cut off the comb,
 then shave off the spurs close to the leg, and stick them upon the
 bleeding head, where they will grow and become ornamental in the shape
 of a pair of horns. This last mode is perhaps the best, but it is not
 so simple and ready as the first. Which ever mode is adopted, the fowl
 should be marked before performing the operation, because the loss of
 blood occasioned by cutting off the comb or a toe, makes the fowl less
 likely to bleed internally during the operation.

 It is very common, soon after the operation, for the chicken to get
 wind in the side, when the wound is healing, between the flesh and
 the skin; it must be relieved by making a small incision in the skin,
 which will let the wind escape.

 Those fowls make the finest capons which are hatched early in the
 spring; they can be cut before the hot weather comes, which is a great
 advantage.

 Never attempt to cut a full-grown cock; it is a useless and cruel
 piece of curiosity. I have never known one to live.

 Be not discouraged with the first difficulties; with practice they
 will disappear; every season you will find yourself more expert, until
 the cutting of a dozen fowls before breakfast will be a small matter.

 It may be well to give a warning against becoming dissatisfied with
 the tools. A raw hand, when he meets with difficulties, is apt to
 think the tools are in fault, and sets about to improve them and
 invent others; but it is only himself that lacks skill, which practice
 alone can give. I have spent money, besides wasting my time in this
 foolish notion, but have always found that the old, original tools,
 which came from China, and where this mode of operating was invented,
 are the best.

 Take care that the tools are not abused by ignorant persons attempting
 to use them; they will last a person's life-time if properly used; but
 if put out of order, none but a surgical instrument maker can repair
 them properly.

 The object in giving publicity to this, is to have the markets of
 Philadelphia well supplied with capons: they have ever been esteemed
 one of the greatest delicacies, preserving the flavor and tenderness
 of the chicken, with the juicy maturity of age. In the Paris and
 London markets, double the price of common poultry is obtained for
 capons.

 Considering the abundance and excellence of poultry in the United
 States, it seems surprising that the art of making capons should be
 almost entirely unknown--it is hoped that this deficiency will now be
 supplied.




GRAFTING AND BUDDING.


For what follows on grafting and budding, we are indebted to that
excellent family paper, the New World. The article was prepared for it
by J. S. Skinner, Esq., of the Post Office Department, Washington, from
an English work, which, he adds, "is not published or much known in
this country."

GRAFTING.--The process of grafting consists in taking off a shoot from
one tree, and inserting it into another, in such a manner as that both
may unite closely, and become one tree; the shoot or cutting thus
employed is called a _scion_, and the tree on which it is inserted or
grafted, a stock. The process of budding has precisely the same object
in view as that of grafting, differing from the latter process only in
the insertion of a bud, instead of a shoot or cutting, into the bark of
another tree. To execute either process with adroitness and success,
considerable practice is required. To excel in either, instructions
should be received from some competent person, who is both willing
and able to impart the necessary information. More knowledge can be
acquired in a short time in this manner than can possibly be attained
by the most attentive perusal of any treatise expressly written upon
the subject. Impressed with the difficulty of the task, many writers
have indeed asserted, that description alone must ever fail to convey
an adequate knowledge of the process; but the intelligent author of
the English Gardener has, with his usual ability, treated the subject
in so clear and comprehensive a manner that we are induced to give the
details of the process in the author's own language.

Before entering upon the subject of grafting and budding, there is
one thing which is equally applicable to both processes, and that is,
that the _stock_ ought to stand the whole summer upon the spot where
it is grafted, before that operation is performed upon it. If stocks
be planted out in the fall, the sap does not rise vigorously enough in
the spring to afford a fair chance to the growing of the graft; another
remark of equal importance is, that fruit-trees stand only _one summer_
on the spot whence they are to be removed to their final destination;
because, if they stand longer than this, they will have large and
long roots, great amputation must take place, and the trees suffer
exceedingly.

_The Time of Grafting_ is generally from the beginning of February to
the end of March,[1] beginning with the earliest sorts of trees, as
plums, cherries, and pears; and ending with the latest, as apples.
But seasons are different, and in a backward season, the season for
grafting will be backward; and in such case, the fulness and bursting
appearance of the buds of the stocks, and the mildness of the weather
must be our guides. However, it is certain that the mild weather, with
occasional showers, is the best time for grafting.

[1] In this climate, April and May are the best months.--ED. AM. AG.

_The Mode of Preparing the Scion_ comes next. Take from the tree from
which you mean to propagate, as many branches of last year's wood as
will cut into the quantity of scions that you want; but in choosing
what branches to take, let the vigor of the tree guide you, in some
measure. If it be a healthy, flourishing, and young tree, take your
branches from the outside shoots, for the upright ones at the top, or
those near the middle, are more likely to produce wood than fruit. Yet
do not take branches from the very lowest part of the tree, if you
can avoid it, as these are sure to be more puling in their nature. In
case the tree be old or weakly, then choose the most vigorous of its
last year's shoots, no matter where they grow. Keep these branches
uncut until you arrive at the season for grafting, keeping them, in
the meanwhile, buried in dry mould; and when that season arrives,
take them up and cut them into the proper lengths for grafting. The
middle part of each branch will generally be found to be the best;
but your branches may be scarce and few in number, and then make use
of every part. Each scion should have from three to six eyes on it,
but six will, in all cases, be quite enough, as there is no use in
an extraordinary length of scion; but, on the contrary, it may be
productive of much mischief, by overloading the head with young shoots
and leaves as summer advances, and thereby making it more subject to
accident from high winds or heavy rains.

_The Operation of Grafting_ is performed many ways, though none of them
differs from any of the others in the _main principle_, which is that
of bringing the under or inner bark of the scion to bear upon the same
bark of the stock. The sap of the stock flows upward toward the scion,
and it will flow on into the scion, provided it find no interruption.
Here, therefore, is the nicety--to fit those two barks so closely, the
one upon the other, that the sap shall proceed onward into the scion,
just as it would have done into the amputated branch, causing the scion
to supplant the branch. I shall only mention and illustrate two modes
of grafting, viz., _tongue-grafting_ and _cleft-grafting_. These two it
is necessary for me to speak of separately, and thoroughly to describe,
for they are not both of them applicable in all cases; the former being
used in grafting on small-sized stocks and small branches of trees, and
the latter on large stocks and large branches.

[Illustration: TONGUE-GRAFTING.--(FIG. 58.)]

_Tongue-Grafting._--Suppose you have your stock of the proper age for
grafting, you cut it off at three or four inches from the ground, and
with a very _sharp, straight, and narrow-bladed grafting-knife_, cut
a thin strip of bark and wood upward, from about two inches below
your already shortened stock. Make this cut at one pull of the knife,
inserting the edge rather horizontally, and when it has gone through
the bark and into the wood a little short of the middle, pull straight
upward, (2, _a, b_;) then at rather less than half way down this cut,
and with the blade of your knife across the cut, and downward, cut a
very _thin tongue_ of not more than three eighths of an inch long, (2,
_c_.) Proceed nearly in the same way with the bottom part of the scion;
cut first a narrow strip of wood and bark out, but not putting the
knife in horizontally, as you have done with regard to the stock, (at
2, _a_,) nor bringing it out straight to the end, to make a shoulder
or angle, as you have done at (2, _a b_;) but make a sloping cut (1,
_a b_,) of about the same length as the cut in the stock, or rather
a little less if anything; then make a tongue (1, _c_) to correspond
with that of the stock, but recollect that this must be cut _upward_
instead of _downward_; then place the scion upon the stock, inserting
the tongue of the scion into the tongue of the stock. Bring the four
edges of bark, that is, the two edges of the cut in the top of the
stock, and the two corresponding edges of the cut in the bottom of the
scion, to meet precisely; or, if the scion be, in diameter, a smaller
piece of wood than the stock, so that its two edges of bark can not
both meet those of the stock, then let only one meet, but be sure that
one meets precisely. But observe, that this can never be unless the
first cut in the stock and that in the scion (2, _a b_,) and (1, _a
b_,) be as even as a die, and performed with a knife scarcely less
sharp than a razor. Take a common pruning-knife, and attempt to make
a cut of this kind, and you will find when you come to fit the scion
on, that, squeeze them together as you may, you will, in most cases,
see light between the parts of the stock and the scion that you are
trying to join, so effectually, as that the sap shall flow out of the
one into the other, unconscious of any division at all! But I will
not suppose anybody so ungain (as it is called in Hampshire) as to go
about so nice an operation as this without being prepared with the
proper instruments for performing it; and therefore, I now suppose the
scion put on properly, and presenting the appearance as in (3, _a_.)
But this is not all; the operation is not yet complete. The two parts
thus joined must be bound closely to one another with matting, or bass,
as the gardeners call it, (4.) A single piece tied on to the stock,
will, if well done, almost insure the junction; but lest parching winds
should come and rip up all vegetation, it is usual to put on besides
the bandage of matting, a ball of well-beaten clay sprinkled over
with a little wood-ashes or the fine siftings of cinders, to cover
completely the parts grafted, that is, from an inch below them to an
inch or so above them, (5;) and, even to prevent this ball of clay from
being washed off by heavy rains, it is well to tie around it a covering
of coarse canvass, or else to earth up the whole plant as you do beans
or peas, drawing a little mound around it so as to reach nearly the top
of the clay. Mr. Harrison prepares his grafting clay in the following
manner: Take two parts of clay and one of horse-dung, free from straw,
mix them together, and beat the mass until the whole is thoroughly
incorporated, then temper it with a little water till it is reduced
to the consistence of stiff paste. This composition _never cracks_ on
drying!

_Future Treatment._--Something now remains to be said on the future
treatment of the grafted plant. In a month's time at least, you will
see whether the scion has taken; it will then be either bursting
forth into leaf or be irrecoverably dead. In this latter case, take
off immediately the canvass, clay, bandage, and dead scion, and let
the stock push forth what shoots it pleases, and recover itself. In
the former case, however, you must, as soon as the scion is putting
forth shoots, cut off, or rub off, all shoots proceeding from the stock
between the ground and the clay, as these, if suffered to push on,
would divert the sap away from the scion, and probably starve it; then
carefully stake the plant, that is, put a small stick into the ground
at within three inches, or thereabouts, of the root, and long enough to
reach a few inches above the scion, which you will tie to it slightly
with a piece of wetted matting. This is really necessary, for when the
shoots proceeding from the scion become half a foot long, they, with
the aid of their leaves, become so heavy as, when blown to and fro by
the wind, to break off immediately above the clay, or become loosened
down at the part joined to the stock. The staking being done, you need
do nothing more till near the end of June, when you should take off the
whole mass of canvass, clay, and bandage, but be careful in taking off
the clay not to break off the plant at the junction. It should be done
by a careful hand, and after a day or two of rainy weather, as then the
clay is moist and comes off without so much danger to the plant as when
it is not. On taking off the clay, there is found a little sharp angle,
left at the top of the stock; this should now be cut smooth off. The
bark of the stock and that of the scion will heal over this, and the
union is then complete. Lastly, it is frequently found that mould, and
sometimes small vermin, have collected around the heretofore covered
parts of the plant, according as the clay has been cracked by the sun.
Rub off all mould with your fingers, (no instrument does it so well,)
and kill all vermin in the same way; and it is not amiss to finish this
work by washing the joined parts with a little soap and water, using a
small paint-brush for the operation. All these things done, you have
only to guard against high winds, which, if the plant be not staked,
as is above described, will very likely be broken off by them; and, in
this work of destruction, you will have the mortification of seeing the
finest of your plants go first.

[Illustration: CLEFT-GRAFTING.--(FIG. 59.)]

_Cleft-Grafting._--This is a species of grafting adopted in cases where
the stock is large, or where it consists of a branch or branches of a
tree headed down. In either of these cases, saw off horizontally, the
part you wish to graft, and smooth the wound over with a carpenter's
plane, or a sharp, long-blade knife, (1.)

Prepare your scion in this manner: At about, an inch and a half from
the bottom, cut it in the form of the blade of a razor; that is, make
it sharp on one side, and let it be blunt at the back, where you will
also take care to leave the bark whole, (2, _a_.) Having thus prepared
the scion, make a split (1) in the crown of the saw-cut downward for
about two inches, taking care that the two sides of this be perfectly
even. Hold it then open, by means of a chisel or a wedge, (or when the
stock is but a small one, your knife,) and insert the scion, the sharp
edge going inward, and the bark side or razor-back remaining outward,
so that, on taking out the wedge or chisel, the cleft closes firmly on
the scion, (3,) the two edges of bark formed by the cleft, squeezing
exactly upon the two edges of bark formed by the blunt razor-back. To
make the two barks meet precisely is the only nicety in this operation;
but this is so essential, that the slightest deviation will defeat
the purpose. In this sort of grafting, the stock on which you graft
is generally strong enough to hold the scion close enough within
its cleft, without the aid of binding, and then it is better not to
bind; but as it is also necessary to prevent air circulating within
the wounded parts both of the stock and the scion, use grafting-clay
to cover them over so as to effectually exclude the air; and cover
the clay with a piece of coarse canvass, wetting it first, and then
binding it on securely. In this way, the stock being strong, you may
insert several scions on the same head, by making several different
clefts, and putting one scion in each; but this can only be to insure
your having two to succeed, for if all the scions that you put on one
head take, you must choose the two most eligible, and sacrifice the
rest, as more than two leading limbs from such head ought not to be
encouraged. The season for performing this sort of grafting, and the
mode of preparing the scion, and the future treatment of the tree, are
precisely the same as in _tongue-grafting_.

_Crown, or Bark-Grafting_ is a very ready method of grafting upon
large, uneven, old stocks and branches. It is practised somewhat later
than the methods above described, that is, from the end of March to the
third week in April, because, in that period, the separation of the
bark from the wood is more easily affected; a circumstance of primary
importance in this case. The tree is to be headed down, the cut being
made horizontally, and the section bored quite even and smooth; then
make a slit in the bark two inches in length, next with the handle of a
budding-knife, carefully open the bark for about a quarter of an inch;
then cut the scion about two inches in a sloping direction, in the form
of a tongue, leaving the bark entire on the outside. The scion thus
prepared, is pressed downward between the bark and the wood as far as
the incision in the stock extends; the bark of the stock readily yields
to the pressure employed, and the scion is supported in its situation
by a few coils of bass-matting, the whole being surrounded by clay.

_Dove-Tail Grafting._--This is a very neat and successful mode of
grafting, originating with Mr. Malone, who gives the following
directions for its performance. The scion is to be selected so as to
have two or three buds above where the knife is to be inserted to
prepare it for the operation; a slip is cut off the end of the scion,
sloping it to the bottom as long as it may be decided to insert it into
the stock. On each side of the cut, as far as it extends, a part of the
bark is to be taken off, leaving the under part broader than the upper,
on which upper or back part always contrive to leave a bud. The stock
or branch to be worked is thus prepared: Being first cut off smooth and
straight, two parallel slits, distant from each other nearly the width
of the scion and the length of its cut part, are then made in the bark
of the branch, observing particularly to slope the knife, so that the
under edge of the cut next the wood may be wider than the outer edge.
The piece of bark between the slits must then be taken out, separating
at the bottom by a horizontal cut. The scion will then slide into the
dove-tail groove thus formed, and, if the work is well performed, will
fit neatly and tightly. A small quantity of the grafting-clay must then
be carefully applied, securing it on with list, or any other convenient
bandage, fastening it at the end with two small nails. The top of the
stock should be entirely covered with clay, sloping it well up to the
grafts, and should be examined often to see if any cracks or openings
appear, which should be immediately filled up with some very soft clay.
The proper time for performing the operation is from the beginning
of April till the middle of May, or earlier if the sap is in motion.
(Gardener's Magazine, Vol. VII.)

[Illustration: BUDDING.--(FIG. 60.)]

BUDDING.--Budding is performed for precisely the same purpose as
grafting, and, like grafting, it is performed in many different ways;
and as long experience has ascertained the best method, namely, that of
T budding, (1,) so called from the form of the two cuts that are made
in the bark of the stock to receive the bud, or _shield-budding_, as it
is sometimes called from the form of the piece of bark (2) on which the
bud is seated, assuming the shape of a shield when it is prepared to be
inserted within the T cut in the stock.

The only solid difference between budding and grafting is this, that
whereas in grafting you insert on the stock a _branch_ already
produced, in budding, you insert only the _bud_. I shall proceed, in
treating of this matter, in the same way that I did in the preceding
article, namely, _as to the season proper for budding, the choosing
and preparing of the bud, the operation of budding, and the future
treatment of the plant budded_.

_The Season for Budding_ is generally from the latter end of July to
the latter end of August, the criterions being a plump appearance of
the buds formed on the spring shoot of the same year, seated in the
angle of a leaf, and a readiness in the bark of the stock to separate
from the wood.

_In Choosing and Preparing the Bud_, fix on one seated at about
the middle of a healthy shoot of the mid-summer growth--these are,
generally speaking, the most inclined to fruitfulness. Choose a cloudy
day, if you have a choice of days at this season, and if not, perform
your work early in the morning, or in the evening. The time being
proper, you sever the branch on which you find the buds to your liking.
Take this with you to the stock that you are going to bud, holding the
branch in your left hand, the largest end downward; make a sloping cut
from about an inch and a half below the bud to about an inch above it,
suffering your knife to go through the bark, and about half way into
the wood, cutting out wood and all. This keeping of the wood prevents
the bud and its bark from drying while you are preparing the incision
in the stock, and if you wish to carry buds of scarce sorts to any
distance, you may do so safely by putting their ends in water, or in
damp moss, but it is always safer, as well in grafting as in budding,
to perform the operation with as much expedition as possible, but
particularly it is so in budding.

_Operation of Budding._--Cut off the leaf under which the bud is
situated, but leave its foot-stalk, (2, _a_,) and by this hold it
between your lips, while with your budding-knife you cut two straight
lines in the stock at the place where you wish to insert the bud, and
this should be where the bark is smooth, free from any bruises or
knots, and on the side rather from the mid-day suns. Of these lines
let the first be horizontal, (1,) and let the next be longitudinal,
beginning at the middle of the first cut and coming downward. Let them,
in short, describe the two principal bars of the Roman letter T. You
have now to take out from the bark on which the bud is, the piece of
wood on which the bark is, and which has served you, up to this time,
to preserve the bud and bark from drying and shrinking. But this is a
nice matter. In doing it you must be careful not to endanger the root
of the bud, as it is called, because in that is its existence. The
bark, (if the season be proper for budding,) will easily detach itself
from this piece of wood, but still it requires a very careful handling
to get it out without endangering the root of the bud. Hold the bud on
your fore-finger, and keep your thumb on the wood opposite; then with
the fore-finger and thumb of the other hand, bend backward and forward
the lower end of the shield, and thus coax the wood to disengage itself
from the bark; and when you find it decidedly doing so, remove your
thumb from it, and the whole piece of wood will come out, leaving you
nothing but a piece of bark of about two and a half inches long, with a
bud and foot-stalk of a leaf on it. If the root of the bud be carried
away with the piece of wood, you will perceive a small cavity where it
ought to be. In this case, throw away the bud and try another.

Having succeeded in the second attempt, now open the two sides of the
longitudinal bar of the T with the ivory haft of your budding-knife,
but in doing this, raise the bark clearly down to the wood, for the
inside of the piece of bark belonging to the bud must be placed
directly against this. Having opened these sides wide enough to receive
the longest end of the bark, insert it nicely, taking especial care
that its inner side be flatly against the wood of the stock. Then cut
the upper end of the bark off, so that its edge shall meet precisely
the edge of the horizontal bar of the T (3, _a_.). With your finger and
thumb bring the two sides of the longitudinal bar over the bark of the
bud, or rather the shield, and with a piece of well-soaked matting,
begin an inch below this bar and bind firmly all the way up to an inch
above the horizontal bar, taking good care to leave the bud peeping
out. Bind in such a way as to exclude the air, for that is the intent
of binding in this case. Tie your piece of matting on first, and wind
it round and round the stock as you would a riband, taking care not
to twist the matting; wind it slowly, and every time you have gone
completely round, give a gentle pull to make it firm.

_Future Treatment._--In a fortnight's time from the operation, you will
discover whether the bud has taken, by its roundness and healthy look;
and, in a fortnight after that, loosen the bandage to allow the plant
to swell, and in about five weeks from the time of budding, take away
the bandage altogether. In this state, the plant passes the winter,
and just as the sap begins to be in motion in the following spring,
you head down the stock at about an inch above the bud, beginning
behind it, and making a sloping cut upward to end above its point.
Some gardeners leave a piece of the stock about six inches long for
the first year, in order to tie the first summer's shoot to it to
prevent its being broken off by the wind. This may be well when the
plant is exposed to high winds, but even then, if you see danger, you
may tie a short stick on the top part of the stock, and to this tie
the young shoot, and then the sap all goes into the shoot from the
bud, instead of being divided between it and six inches of stock left
in the other way. There are some advantages which budding has over
grafting, and these I think it right to mention. In the first place,
universal experience has proved that certain trees succeed much better
when budded, than the same trees do when grafted, such are the peach,
nectarine, apricot, plum, and cherry; indeed, the rule is, that all
stone-fruits do better budded than grafted, that they are, when budded,
less given to gum, a disease peculiar to stone-fruits, and often very
pernicious to them. You may also, by budding, put two more branches
upon a stock that would be too weak to take so many grafts, and you
may bud in July when grafting has failed in March and April. The
disadvantage of budding is that the trees are rendered one year later
in coming into bearing than when you graft.

Mr. Knight has recommended a mode of budding, (Hort. Trans., vol. I.).
He thus describes the process: In the month of June, as the luxuriant
shoots of my peach-trees were grown sufficiently firm to permit the
operation, I inserted buds of other varieties into them, employing two
distinct ligatures to bind the buds in their places. One ligature was
first placed above the bud inserted, and upon the transverse section
through the bark; the other which had no further office than that of
securing the bud, was applied in the usual way. As soon as the buds had
attached themselves, the ligatures last applied were taken off, but
the others were suffered to remain. The passage of the sap upward, was
in consequence much obstructed, and the inserted bud began to vegetate
strongly in July, and when these had afforded shoots about four inches
long, the remaining ligatures were taken off to admit the excess of
sap to pass on, and the young shoots were nailed to the wall, being
there properly exposed to light, their wood ripened well, and afforded
blossoms in the succeeding spring.

       *       *       *       *       *

We should be pleased if any of our readers could give us further
information about the shrub described below.

  _From the Yankee Blade._




HIGH CRANBERRY.


A gentleman of this place having occasion some twenty years ago, to
make an excursion into the northern part of the state, near Lake
Umbagog, where the Magalloway empties into the Androscoggin, passed
through a large piece of low land, comprising many acres, which was
covered with the high cranberry as far as the eye could see, exhibiting
the most beautiful and splendid appearance, perhaps, ever displayed
from any of the spontaneous productions of the forests of New England.
He says that some shrubs which had acquired the magnitude of trees of
several inches diameter, were literally bent to the ground, under the
weight of their luxuriant fruit; and such was their abundance, that a
single individual might have gathered more than thirty bushels in a day.

The high cranberry in dense forests, sometimes acquires the respectable
altitude of 15 or 20 feet; but in more open places, its height is
generally from 6 to 8 or 10 feet. Its stem and leaf very much resemble
those of the snow-ball; and the flower, while it lasts, is but little
inferior in elegance and beauty to the flower of that highly ornamented
and much esteemed shrub. The fruit is smaller than that of the running
cranberry, of a bright red color when ripe, and grows in large, flat
clusters on the ends of the branches. Its taste is very acid, and
rather austere. It contains a large, hard, flat seed, which is an
objection to the use of it without sifting or straining; but being
sifted or strained after stewing, it is excellent for sauce, pies, and
tarts. Prepared with sugar, in the usual way, it makes a most delicious
jelly.




ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.

  _For the American Agriculturist._




FINE WOOL SHEEP.

  _Buskirk's Bridge, October, 1843._


I HAVE read the article headed "Sheep, Paular Merinos," over the
signature of Examiner, in the May number, page 52 of your paper,
purporting to give us plain farmers an insight into sheep breeding,
&c.; and what fine flocks used to be, when the "old fashioned Merino
sheep" were in their "glory." What they were a quarter of a century
ago, I cannot say, that was before I had any thing to do with sheep
in this country; but I presume that _fine_ flocks were then not so
numerous as they are now. I can not agree with the writer, "that the
fine flocks of the United States are sadly deteriorated, indeed, nearly
run out." Since 1825, I have been acquainted with fine sheep in this
country, and I venture to say, that there are three, four, or five, and
in this section, _ten_, fine flocks, where there was but one 18 years
ago.

If Examiner will honor me with a visit, an invitation I herewith
cordially tender to him, I will show him _fine_ flocks, consisting of
more than a few individuals--a dozen or two, or may be a few scores, of
picked sheep together, and kept in the very highest possible condition;
no, but flocks from 500 to 1,000--even more--which might alter his
judgment, if that is not swayed by prejudice. Many of these large
flocks shear on an average 3 lbs. and over, of wool, well washed on
the sheep's back, the quality of which is superior to the "Paular,"
and "old-fashioned Merinos;" and I doubt not, should Examiner make
a comparison between the two kinds himself, he would pronounce it
_superfine_; and besides the quality, he would also discover a great
difference in the condition and cleanliness of the wool. These flocks
are high-grade Saxons, and show a result not quite so "unfortunate" as
Examiner would make us believe. My own flock of 240 ewes and lambs and
a few bucks, pure, unmixed Saxons, whose pedigree can be traced back
to the importations of the Elector of Saxony, from the royal flocks of
Spain, sheared this year 2 lbs. 13 oz. per head; last year 2 lbs. 14
oz. clean wool. If I had had a proportionate number of weathers among
them, the average would have been at _least_ 3 lbs. I repeat then, that
the wool of the "Paular," or "old fashioned Merinos," does not compare
with the Saxons and their crosses in quality and condition. If the
fleeces from the former are heavier than from the latter, let it be
borne in mind that they contain more _gum_, and _yolk_, dirt, &c.,; are
not so fine, and that the sheep _consume a greater quantity of feed_.
These are facts well known to every good judge of wool, and to every
experienced, practical shepherd.

I would ask whether Examiner had his eyes closed against them when
he was examining the fine-wooled flocks of the United States, and
declared them "sadly deteriorated, indeed, nearly run out." I do not
pretend, Mr. Editor, that I am acquainted with all "the fine flocks of
the United States, but allow me to say, that my acquaintance among
the wool-growers is pretty extensive. I am a purchaser, as well as a
grower of wool, and handle no inconsiderable quantities yearly. My
purchases this year amount to over 130,000 lbs., and I have examined at
least 300,000 lbs., and a great variety of flocks of different grades
and character, have come under my observation--sheep kept in the very
lowest up to the very highest condition. I have always found, that
where the blood of the "old fashioned Merinos, Paulars," or whatever
their possessors are pleased to call them, predominated, there also I
found _gum_, yolk, dirt, and other substances adhering to the wool,
in great abundance, _unfit to make cloth_ of, which goes far to make
up the greater weight of fleece over the Saxony. Indeed, sir, when
gentlemen talk of fine fleeces weighing 8, 9, or 10 lbs. they forget to
mention "_including gum, yolk, dirt, and other substances adhering to
the fleece_."

Some years since, I saw a lot of "old fashioned Merino" wool at a
factory in Massachusetts, which the manufacturer assured me would lose
55 per cent. in cleansing. "Indeed," said he, "we can never estimate
the dirt in such wool correctly; it always exceeds our estimate, and
we invariably suffer loss." And recently, a gentleman, a dealer in
wool, told me that he sent this season, a large quantity to Boston to
be sold, and that on making sale of some 36,000 lbs., the manufacturer
who bought it, rejected all gummy, dirty fleeces, declaring that he
would not have them, as such wool would lose more than 50 per cent.
in cleansing. And to use the gentleman's own words, "there it lies,
in a corner of the wool room, and I do not know what to do with it;"
observing at the same time, that the manufacturers were "getting more
cunning." There was a time when the supply fell short of the demand,
and almost any wool, however gummy and dirty, found ready purchasers;
for manufacturers were often compelled to buy it, in order to keep
their machinery in operation; but that time has gone by, and they are
now more choice in their selections, and when they come across a lot of
such wool they pass it by, with observations like these: "I do not want
it, it is too dirty, let him keep it for some body else"!

In your July number, page 130 and 131, Mr. Editor, you have made a
calculation of the number of sheep, and the quantity of wool obtained
therefrom. The census of 1840 shows, say 20,000,000 in the United
States. Of this number you estimate only 11,000,000 shorn sheep,
yielding 24,500,000 lbs. of wool, and the lambs at 9,000,000.--With due
deference to your superior opportunities for information, I beg leave
to say that you are over estimating the number of lambs, for every
practical wool-grower knows, that that proportion is too large--if
you had said one third, you would have come nearer the truth. I think
you are mistaken also that the census of 1840 included lambs, it was
exclusive of lambs.(_a_) You are, however, perfectly safe in estimating
the average weight of fleece in the United States at 21/4 lbs. This is
certainly too low by one fourth of a pound.(_b_) In this region it
exceeds 23/4 lbs. Then you say, that by producing a superior quality
of wool, its value would be increased nine cents per pound; this
certainly is attainable; but the way in which you propose to bring it
about, namely, by crossing with the "Paular, or old-fashioned Merinos,"
you would not obtain that end, thousands of fine flocks would be
reduced in quality.(_c_) In this section it would reduce the quality
as much as you wish to improve it. Coarse sheep would be improved by
the cross; but to apply it to all the sheep in the United States, as I
understand you to say, you would find yourself very much mistaken in
the result. I venture to say, that on the same quantity of feed, you
can not increase the heft of fleece of a fine flock shearing from 23/4 to
3 lbs., by your cross up to 33/4 to 4 lbs. per head, and have the wool in
equally good condition.(_d_) An increase of feed will do much toward
increasing the heft of fleece. A few words more and I have done.

Examiner, page 52, says: "As to Paular Bucks, it strikes me that you
might, for any practical purpose, just as well have advised a cross of
the fabulous Unicorn, for it would be just as easy to find the one as
the other at the present time in the United States; for depend upon it,
there is no such thing now existing, as _a Paular Buck_, nor _any thing
deserving the name_ in the whole country." And you say that "there are
still large and valuable flocks scattered over the country."(_e_)

  H. D. GROVE.

(_a_) Immediately upon the receipt of this letter of Mr. Grove's we
wrote on to Washington to ascertain the facts in the case, but were
answered that the census bureau was abolished, and they could not tell.
We know that when the person for taking the census in the district in
which we were then residing, called upon us, he required the number of
colts, calves, lambs, and pigs, although some of them were only three
days old at the time; and to our objection of rendering an account of
such young stock, he remarked, "never mind, they will be grown when
the census appears, and it is the law." Most of those to whom we have
put the question about rendering an account of the lambs in their
flocks, say they did so; others do not recollect. If there has been
irregularity with sheep-owners in giving an account of their lambs, of
course we are incorrect; and we think, upon reflection, we may have
estimated the number of lambs too high; though, on the other hand, we
are quite certain Mr. Grove has set them down as entirely too few; for
we know flocks that produce within a fraction as many lambs annually as
there are breeding ewes.

(_b_) Perhaps when Mr. Grove has travelled south and west more
extensively, and seen in the months of March and April, as many
half-bare sheep as we have, which shed their wool from disease, want of
care, &c., he may come to a different conclusion. We have often seen
flocks in the same condition at the north too, leaving many of our
farmers little to boast of in this respect.

(_c_) We have turned to the article to which Mr. Grove alludes, but
really, we do not find that we used the expressions attributed to
us. We said "Spanish Merino," also, "unadulterated Merino;" meaning
thereby, the Rambouillets more particularly. We also spoke in general
terms, in recommending the use of these. Such a flock of Saxons as Mr.
Grove's we would _especially except_; and if the accounts which we hear
of them be correct, and we have no doubt they are, we would not cross
them with anything less fine than themselves. They are unquestionably
superior animals, as is proved by their superior weights of fleece, and
the high price the wool commands; and we wish, since the name of Saxon
has been so basely misused in this country by miserable counterfeits,
that Mr. Grove would give his flock the name of Electoral; for they
and their descendants are probably the only ones entitled to it in
the United States. With this name, they would then fairly stand aloof
from the common herd, as they deserve, and not be associated in idea
hereafter, with the miserable riff-raff of the country, passing under
the general name of Saxons. It is our intention next season to call and
see Mr. Grove's flock.

(_d_) We meant to be understood as alluding to a cross on the coarser
and more restiff sheep of the country, when we spoke of obtaining an
increase of weight of wool on the same food, and we know that this can
be done.

(_e_) True enough, but we did not say these valuable flocks were
Paulars; nor did we go so far as to assert that they were pure Merinos
of any distinct name. We wish it understood, that we do not endorse all
the opinions of Examiner any more than we do other correspondents--he
speaks for himself, and we for ourselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




SEA-MUD AS A FERTILIZER.

  _Flushing, L. I., November 8th, 1843._


CAN you inform me whether the sea-mud which is found on the shore,
below high-water mark, is of any value to the farmer; and if it is,
in what way would you advise that it should be applied? Do you think
that it would answer in a compost heap, or would it be preferable to
put it into the cattle-yard or hog-pen? I have thought that the only
objection to using it would be on account of the great quantity of
salt, which it contains; although Leibig and other celebrated writers,
speak in very favorable terms upon the application of salt. And here
arises another question. Are not those farms which are situated upon
the sea-shore sufficiently supplied with salt by the winds which are
constantly sweeping over them? Johnson remarks that this is the case,
and if this is so, would not the application of this sea-mud be too
strong? although I am inclined to believe that by drying the mud,
much of the virtue of the salt would necessarily be destroyed, and as
sea-water contains, as Leibig states, many very fertilizing qualities,
this mud which perhaps has been accumulating for ages, must have
imbibed a large quantity of all those properties, of which sea-water is
composed. By answering these questions you will greatly oblige one of
your subscribers.

  R. B. C.

For an answer to the above see page 322.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following communication was read before the New York Farmers' Club
by the Hon. Henry Meigs at its meeting August 29, and is obligingly
furnished us for publication.

  _For the American Agriculturist._




FARM OF HUGH MAXWELL, Esq.


GOOD EFFECTS OF MARL.--In a conversation with Hugh Maxwell, Esq., some
short time since, he stated some facts in relation to the fertilising
power of a red marl abundantly existing at Nyack, which induced me to
visit the spot. I found Mr. Maxwell's farm of 110 acres bounded by the
Hudson, well worth a visit. The whole was in excellent fence, made of
the loose stones found on the land, neatly piled about 41/2 feet high,
forming fields of from 4 to 8 acres. The formation of these fences has
used nearly all the stones which were on the surface of the lands. And
in this it would seem as if Divine Providence had caused the rocks to
be distributed of the proper size for fencing. Had the pieces been much
larger or smaller they would not have answered the purpose so well as
they now do. If they had been planted two feet under ground, or had
been piled in larger masses, the labor of fencing would have been very
greatly increased.

This farm, as well as all those about Nyack, lies on the singular mass
of sandstone included by a front of about five miles on the river.
All the surrounding rocks are of other materials. This sandstone,
when quarried, exhibits strata of a kind of red marl of many feet in
thickness, lying between strata of the sandstone. The quarry-men throw
it out of their way, and millions of loads are lying near the water's
edge, so that in many places vessels can lie alongside a bed of it,
and slide it on board. On Mr. Maxwell's farm, the former proprietor,
desirous of making extensive hard walks through his garden, caused
this marl to be put upon them about one foot deep. Soon after this
was finished, the walks began to produce clover; the white in such
profusion and persevering succession, that all prospect of using the
paths in that condition was abandoned: they could not be kept in order
by the hoe. Mr. Maxwell being strongly impressed by this occurrence,
determined on applying it to the surface of his farm. I saw a field
of corn of several acres which had been top-dressed this year with
the red marl, now bearing not less than 80 bushels of shelled corn
to the acre--as great a product as is obtained from the best city
manure, costing at Nyack nearly 37 cents per load. I saw an upland
field of wheat, on which, as an experiment, Mr. Maxwell had top-dressed
with this marl a space of three rods by two, from which I pulled an
average bunch of straw-stubble, that is more than double the size and
weight of any like parcel of stubble, to be found in the whole field
of several acres. Unfortunately the husbandman had cradled all the
wheat indiscriminately, which prevented Mr. Maxwell from examining the
separate product of the wheat. I should not hesitate to pronounce it a
double product. Mr. M. top-dressed a field of oats with this marl, and
the yield was 70 bushels per acre. He top-dressed a field of clover
with it the third year from the seeding, and the product is heavier
than the crop of the _second year_. This field was dressed with ten
loads of marl per acre. The corn is large 12-row yellow, and the stalks
are about 10 feet high. The corn-blades never curled during the late
drought, while other fields all curled. The corn was worked with the
hand-harrow once, with the cultivator twice, and was hoed twice. No
plowing between the hills. Mr. M. thinks that in dry weather it is
very injurious to run the plow through, for it cuts the smaller roots
of the corn. He has tried 25 bushels of hickory ashes, against 25 of
anthracite coal ashes, and found no perceptible difference in the
result.

The general effect of this red marl is perceptible in almost every
plant and tree in that vicinity. Fruit-trees are especially vigorous
and free from disease. Flowering shrubs, roses particularly, seem not
to have been touched by any insect. I pulled up a mullein stalk growing
on a naked mound of this marl, which measures nine feet in height, and
the flower stem, which is covered with buds, is four feet in extent.
The trees, excepting peach alone, are more thriving than those I have
anywhere seen. The peach-trees have the yellows. Moss roses growing
in rich grass are remarkably strong; Mr. M. finds that they do better
closely surrounded by grass than in clear ground. He has ten kinds of
healthy cherry-trees, including the red and white ox-heart, and the
bull's eye. He has freely given, and wishes to distribute buds and
grafts to all those who ask for them. Mr. M. has very healthy apricots,
which have yielded fine fruit. _He smoked the blossoms with sulphur and
pitch_, and all the fruit was perfect. _This smoking was done in the
evening._

Some of the fields had never been but partially cultivated, on account
of being so swamped that cattle mired in them. He made in one four-acre
field a drain ten rods long, and three feet deep, filled in with coarse
stone. This drain formed a _perpetual spring for his cattle_, and this
barren field has now buckwheat of at least _thirty bushels per acre_.
_One and a half bushels_ of seed was sowed per acre. No manure needed.
This drain cost $1.75. Twelve acres were drained in the same style at a
cost of $150; this field is now fine, and asks for no manure from New
York, or Nyack marl. He prefers the same amount of marl to best New
York city manure for all grains and grapes.

Mr. M. has the old English yew thriving in open air in winter. The
European mountain ash, white and red linden, red maple, weeping ash,
weeping beech, weeping elm, Madeira nut, (one five years old bearing
fruit,) Spanish chestnut now in fruit, (this tree has also some
blossoms on it at this time.) Apricots grafted on plum stock are very
thrifty.

A REMARKABLE HORSE.--In passing through Mr. Maxwell's barn-yard, I
noticed a couple of horses, one of which was hoppled with a strong iron
chain. What mischievous young horse have you there? He replied, it is
my old family mare Kate, who has carried me, and my wife and children,
safely for the last one and twenty years! I bought her when she was
about four years old, but she will break fences now (wooden ones) with
her irons on, she is so active and cunning.

LOCUST EGGS.--I remarked at Nyack the work of the locust, and Mr. M.
and Thomas Addis Emmet, Esq., examined with a good microscope, a twig
worked by the little insect. The twig being split in the line of the
work, exhibited the whole process of the egg deposite. The twig is
pierced nearly to its centre at every three quarters of an inch, or
nearly so; the wood is rendered fibrous, it is then lifted up, and
the eggs, which are of a long, oval form, are deposited side by side
at an angle of about 45 degrees to the grain of the twig, and the
fibrous tuft of wood placed over them, with its end sticking out; these
incisions being repeated every inch on a line for some few inches in
each twig. With the microscope, we saw the eyes of the young locusts
always heads to the centre. The general outline of the young animal was
perceptible through its delicate membranous cover. They moved slightly
on being disturbed. Almost every twig so operated on by the locust was
entirely dead. The magnifying power of the microscope was perhaps 40 or
50.

VALUE OF AN ORCHARD.--I visited an apple orchard at Nyack, which
arrested my attention by its regular and healthy appearance. I found
young Van Houton at home, who, with perfect good feeling and true
politeness, gave me the account of the orchard which I desired. When
his father was about fifty years of age, he undertook to plant 150
winter pippin-trees on that spot. His neighbors thought him an old fool
to plant twigs of apple at his time of day. Young Van Houton, then
about 16 years of age, held the little nurslings in the holes while
his father filled in the soil. The old gentleman continued to prune
them, so that they are widely branched and open for air and sun within
the mass of branches. For twenty or twenty-two years past, the old
gentleman has often received $1,000 a year for his apples. Sometimes $6
per barrel; sometimes sold in the orchard for $1 per barrel. That old
gentleman and his wife are now, between them, 174 years old. Let no man
be afraid to plant winter pippins because he is fifty or sixty years of
age.

I have been highly pleased with my excursion. When gentlemen of high
rank in learned professions are found turning that intellectual
force which has influenced the most wealthy and intelligent portion
of mankind, from law, politics, &c., to that greatest, best of all
arts--agriculture, I look for good results and I find them. The old
world is hard at work in this direction, and I hope that we shall watch
her operations with the eye of our own bird, and see to it, that we be
not excelled in any good thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




MEDITERRANEAN WHEAT.

  _Wheatland, Va., November 2, 1843._


I have noticed your remarks in the October No. of your paper, on the
Mediterranean wheat. Your views coincided with mine when I first sowed
this variety of wheat; but I have sown it now for two seasons, and
the change has been so great in the color, as to convince me that by
cultivating it here, it will lose its dark color, and become as good
in that respect, and yield as much flour as any wheat we have. The two
seasons I have raised it, it has been the best wheat I had. I have
doubts whether it will tiller as much as some other varieties, and
therefore sow it much thicker.

  ROBERT L. WRIGHT.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




TOPPING COTTON--MARL.

  _Sumpter District, S. C., Nov. 4th, 1843._


IN those excellent matter-of-fact articles on the cultivation of
cotton, which have appeared in the late numbers of your paper, by Dr.
Philips of Miss., and which, by the way, are the best I have ever seen
on the subject, I do not recollect that he has touched upon the subject
of topping cotton. I have made one experiment in this, and was pleased
with the result. Some planters north of us, I understand, have also
tried this method, and find the cotton is not so apt to shed, as when
it is not topped, especially in wet seasons. Ordinarily we reckon the
first week in August the best time for topping; but this, of course,
will depend upon the season, and the forwardness of the crop--for
sometimes it must be earlier, and sometimes later.

I tried the effects of what I suppose to be marl, on a small spot in
one of my fields, say about one acre. The marl I judge to be of poor
quality, yet can not say, positively, as I have no analysis of it.
I dug it out in January last, and spread it broad-cast, at the rate
of 30 loads to the acre, as large as an ordinary pair of mules would
carry. It seemed to pulverize well, exposed to the severe frost of last
winter, and I plowed it in deeper than I usually plow, and harrowed the
land well. The result is, I shall get full one third if not one half
more cotton off of this piece than any other part of the field, which
more than pays me for the trouble.

I need not say that we read the articles on manures in the
Agriculturist with much interest; for many of us are beginning to learn
that it is not only easier and better, but even _cheaper_ to renovate
our old lands, than emigrate to a new country and bring new lands into
cultivation.

  C. MCD.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




HINTS ON THE CULTIVATION OF WHEAT.

  _Buffalo, October 25th, 1843._


THERE are four conditions that modify the value of a wheat crop. One
may not only be larger in measure than another, but heavier for the
same measure; yielding more flour from a given weight; and lastly,
affording a greater proportion of gluten from the same quantity
of flour. It is necessary for the farmer to have each of these
considerations in view, if he would attain the utmost success in the
cultivation of this invaluable grain. My object, in this brief article,
will be, to afford some helps to the agriculturist in increasing the
ultimate value of his crop. As a starting point, it will, perhaps, be
most instructive to inquire, what are the constituent elements of wheat?

Sprengel has analyzed both grain and straw, and the following is the
result:--1000 lbs. of wheat afford 11.77 lbs. and of wheat straw, 35.18
lbs. of ash, consisting of

                            Grain of wheat.   Straw of wheat.
  Potash                         2.25 lbs.       0.20 lbs.
  Soda                           2.40             .29
  Lime                            .96            2.40
  Magnesia                        .90             .32
  Alumina with a trace of iron    .26             .90
  Silica                         4.00           28.70
  Sulphuric acid                  .50             .37
  Phosphoric acid                 .40            1.70
  Chlorine                        .10            0.30
                                -----           -----
                                11.77           35.18

This analysis shows an amount of ash far below the average. Davy found
15.5 lbs. of ash in 100 lbs. of ripe wheat straw; and Johnstone, in one
variety, grown on a soil abounding in limestone, 16.5 per cent. of ash.

Thus it will be seen, according to the above analysis of Sprengel,
that of the total of grain, less than 11/2 per cent., and of straw,
rather more than 31/2 per cent. is earthy or inorganic matter; while all
the remainder is composed of the organic materials, carbon, oxygen,
hydrogen, and nitrogen, of which carbon alone constitutes about one
half. All these constituents are absolutely essential to the perfection
of the crop. In the natural condition of a fertile soil when first
reclaimed, these materials are usually found in sufficient abundance
to produce wheat. Such was the condition of nearly all the land in New
England, and the eastern portion of our own state; but a few years of
careless, unscientific cropping, has exhausted one or more of those
constituents which may have existed in an available form; and much
of it, after a very few of the first years of its cultivation, has
been of little or no value for wheat, under the system of tillage
there adopted. It has been asserted by Dr. Dana, that in a soil
purely granitic (and much of the land in that region partakes of this
character), there is potash enough for successive crops of wheat for
3,000 years, and lime enough to last more than twice that period.
But the result is the same for the growing vegetation, whether the
materials do not exist at all, or are locked up beyond the reach of
it. It is absolutely certain, if wheat will not grow with care and
industry, and all the usual appliances of good husbandry, where it
once nourished successfully, there is one or more ingredients wanted,
in such a condition, that the plants can appropriate them to their own
nourishment. And first of the inorganic matters.

The proportion of straw will vary from 2 to 31/2 times the weight of the
grain. Suppose the quantity taken off the land be estimated at 21/2 times
the weight of the grain. In a series of crops averaging 20 bushels of
wheat per acre, for 30 years, we shall have as the result 36,000 lbs.
of grain, and 90,000 lbs. of straw carried off the soil, charged with
all the materials above enumerated, and probably sufficient to reduce
the land to a very small capacity for production.

Some limited portions of the earth, as the plains of Babylon, when
under skilful cultivation, the valleys of the Indus and the Nile,
and the fields of Sicily, almost since the days of the flood, have
produced luxuriantly, without the aid of manure to any extent; but it
must be remembered the former have their fertility annually renewed by
the rich overflowings of the rivers, which are charged with all the
materials necessary to restore exhausted nature; while the soil of the
last, being wholly of basaltic origin, is rich in the alkalies, which
a year or two of rest, is sufficient to replenish in a soluble state,
to be again taken up by the luxuriant crop. Hence, we have witnessed
a drainage of nearly all the products from these fertile regions, for
thousands of years, with impunity. But they are exceptions which only
go to prove the general rule. The farmer must look to it, that all the
ingredients that enter into his crops, are supplied by the materials in
his soil, or a deficiency, or entire failure, will be the inevitable
result.

Although all the constituents entering into the straw and grain, are
absolutely essential to their perfection, they are not all equally
essential to be contained in the soil. It is indispensable, however,
that the earthy or inorganic portion of them be there, for these can
not be obtained elsewhere. How shall they be best supplied? Ashes, it
is believed, afford the cheapest, as well as one of the most effectual
applications that can be made for grain. Of the ten fixed ingredients
enumerated as entering into wheat, ashes yield potash, soda, lime,
magnesia, sulphuric and phosphoric acids, in large proportions, and
silica and iron in smaller. The chemical operation of the potash, and
carbonate and sulphate of lime, however, when added to the soil, is to
supply the silica, in a soluble state, from its natural condition, (it
being found in abundance for this object in every soil, except in such
as are formed almost exclusively of peat,) for the demands of the crop.

An increased supply of lime and gypsum, beyond what is found in the
ashes, is frequently advantageous; and when the latter is beneficial,
as it generally is, it should never be withheld to an extent in
the highest degree useful. Of the operation of this last material,
beyond yielding a portion of its sulphur to the gluten, we have as
yet no satisfactory explanation. In respect to the theory of its
concentrating ammonia in the soil from the atmosphere, we have very
contradictory authority. Liebig asserts it, Johnstone questions it, and
Dana denies it; yet the increasing fertility its application produces,
would seem to give the weight of experience in favor of Liebig's views.

The chlorine and soda, if not furnished by the ashes in proportions
sufficiently large, may be procured by the application of common salt,
which yields both. The phosphoric acid may be obtained in any required
quantity, by the addition of bones, which, dry or calcined, yield
both that acid and lime, phosphate of lime constituting 86 per cent.
of bones. Most soils contain alumina in abundance to furnish the food
requisite for wheat; yet as it is one of the most valuable soils for
this grain, both as seizing upon and retaining ammonia, and furnishing
a firm foothold for the roots of the plants, it is important that lands
intended for this purpose, should be adequately supplied with alumina
as a top-dressing, if naturally deficient in it.

We have, then, above, all the inorganic materials for the purpose
required. But there is about 97 per cent. of the crop yet to be made up
of the organic constituents, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen.
How shall they be provided for?

First, by the selection of a calcareous or clay soil, which will
furnish a proper bed for the roots of the plant, and by their peculiar
mechanical texture and chemical composition, will not only hold the
manures incorporated with them, but also draw some of the requisite
constituents largely from the air; the former absorbing carbonic acid,
and the latter ammonia.

Second, by the liberal application of common farm-yard manure, to a
crop preceding that of wheat, which will leave a rich mould highly
conducive to an abundant yield of perfect grain. An instance has been
recently given, of a Maryland farmer raising large successive crops
of wheat, by the application of putrescent manure directly upon the
grain, and all injurious effects were obviated by the use of a moderate
quantity of lime. This is a practice, however, which has not been found
generally to be successful, causing either blight, or such rapid and
luxuriant growth, as to crinkle and lodge. This effect is also produced
in peaty and rich alluvial soils, where the silicate of potash, so
essential to the formation of a strong, upright stalk, is not furnished
in a quantity large enough for the object.

Third, the liberal use of charcoal scattered through the soil. It is
claimed from its use, that the wheat crop of France has been largely
augmented within the few past years. Several instances of its greatly
beneficial effects, have been noticed in this country; though its
influence has not hitherto been felt on wheat, by an extensive Virginia
planter, in two or three recent experiments. The great power of
condensing gases peculiar to charcoal, was noticed by some of the early
chemists. Murray mentions it, and Saussure gives a table of results, in
which he shows that perfectly dry charcoal from boxwood, will absorb
90 volumes of ammonia; 85 of muriatic acid; 65 of sulphurous acid; 55
of sulphuretted hydrogen; 35 of carbonic acid, &c. This condensation
takes place in its pores, and does not produce any alteration, or new
chemical compounds of the gases thus stored up; but their use in an
agricultural point of view, is invaluable; for while the coal yields no
fertilizing matter from its own substance, being nearly indestructible,
it takes from the atmosphere in great abundance, and hoards up for the
future use of the plants, one of the most evanescent, as well as most
useful materials for their perfection, viz., the nitrogen contained in
the ammonia.

A fourth means for procuring a good yield of wheat, is by alternating
with clover, and turning in a liberal share of it as a preparation for
the wheat. This is practised extensively throughout the wheat districts
of the United States, and has resulted in great benefit; for besides
yielding a portion of food to the grain, it keeps the ground in the
best possible mechanical condition.

A fifth means, is to return all the straw and chaff to the soil, as
they contain a large quantity of the identical materials required for a
succeeding crop.

With the foregoing causes in full action, and an adequate supply of
moisture, whether from rains, dews, or artificial irrigation, the crop
will draw largely from the atmosphere for the supply of its required
organic constituents. Carbon will be furnished from its carbonic acid;
nitrogen from its ammonia; hydrogen from its vapor, dews, and ammonia;
and oxygen from air, water, and soil.

The use of all these materials, _together with the selection of the
best varieties of seed_, will give the first three requisites of a
wheat crop; large measure, heavy weight, and much flour.

Manures peculiarly adapted to the object, will tend in the highest
degree to produce the greatest quantity of _gluten_, the most valuable
portion of the flour. It is true, that climate has much to do in
condensing, and of course, improving the value of wheat. It is a
general principle, that the warmer and drier the climate where it is
grown, the more valuable the grain. Wheat from the south of Europe,
is worth more than when grown in the north; and that from any portion
of the United States, owing to our superior dryness of climate, is
more nutritive than what is produced in Great Britain. This difference
is increased from 8 to 14 per cent. in favor of the American. Gluten
varies in wheat from 8 to 35 per cent.; in rye, 9 to 13; barley, 3 to
6; and oats 2 to 5. The _quality_ of wheat with regard to the quantity
of gluten it contains, is nicely estimated and fully regarded by
accomplished bakers.

The nitrates of potash, or soda, are frequently used in England to
increase not only the quantity, but especially the quality of their
flour, a practice the high prices of land and produce may render
profitable there, though it is hardly to be expected they could
generally be used in this country to a profit. In an experiment lately
tried in England, one acre of wheat dressed with one cwt. of nitrate
of soda, gave 421/2 bushels, weighing 603/4 lbs. per bushel; another acre
dressed with two cwt. yielded 47-3/8 bushels, weighing 601/2 lbs.; while
an undressed acre, in every other respect similar to the others,
yielded only 27-7/8 bushels, weighing 61 lbs. Numerous other instances
could be given equally conclusive.

Although we may not be justified in using these somewhat expensive
salts, so highly charged with nitrogen, there are sources of supply
within our reach, especially rich in this material, and abounding in
many of the other ingredients of fertility. These are animal manures
of all kinds, but more particularly urine, human excrements, and
the offal of animals, such as uncalcined bones, horns, hair, hides,
flesh, blood, &c. All of these contain large proportions of nitrogen,
and if carefully incorporated into the soil, would tend largely to
the increased production and value of the wheat crops throughout the
country. An experiment was made in manuring wheat with cow dung, which
contains the smallest proportion of nitrogen, and this yielded 11.95
per cent. of gluten. Another parcel, grown on land manured with human
urine, gave 35.1 per cent. Thus it will be seen, that the maximum of
value in wheat, may be reached, by the application of an article,
almost everywhere wasted in the United States.

It is by skilfully feeding the wheat plant with all the nourishment
that it can take up, that the crops may be indefinitely increased. Lord
Hardwicke stated, in a speech before the Royal Ag. Soc. of England,
that the fine Suffolk wheat had produced 76 bushels per acre; and
another and more improved variety had yielded the astonishing quantity,
of 82 bushels per acre. There is no comparison between the capacity
of an animal and seeds, to produce results; for while the former is
limited to a definite growth, which no effort of science or skill
can augment, a seed may multiply beyond almost any assignable limit.
We have been shown a stool of wheat, originating from a single seed,
the growth of the present season, with 30 stalks, averaging from 100
to 110 grains on each head. Over 3,000 perfect grains, is thus the
product of a single parent in one season. It requires, then, but the
proper pabulum to produce good wheat, within the wheat latitudes, in
every portion of the Union. Some of our worn-out eastern lands may be
so totally unsuited to its growth, as not to justify the efforts of
reclaiming or fitting them for this object, especially, while we have a
region in the west, every way adapted by nature, to its most successful
cultivation. But we can not for a moment doubt, that when those western
fields become comparatively full, industry and science will combine to
clothe again those hills and valleys (now but partially robed with a
scanty herbage), with teeming crops of wheat, such as gave to them, in
their pristine days, a fame for fertility seldom exceeded.

  R. L. ALLEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




A PENNSYLVANIA DAIRY.

  _Philadelphia, Nov. 6th, 1843._


NOTICING in your October number an account of a dairy on Long Island, I
am induced to give you a description of one in this vicinity. Mr. Henry
Charley has a dairy farm near Laurel Hill, where he keeps from 40 to
50 cows, consisting of Ayrshire, Holderness, Alderny, Durham, and a
few natives; but mostly crossed with a fine, thorough-bred Short-Horn
bull, and is raising full bloods, and high grades of this breed as fast
as possible. He makes veal of his bull-calves, and raises all his best
heifer-calves from his best cows for his own use. I found the cows
luxuriating in a rich clover pasture when I visited them last summer
between 2 and 3 o'clock, the hour for afternoon milking, from which
they were taken by the herdsman, and driven half a mile to the barn.
This is a stone building 100 feet long, 46 feet wide, with a wing of
60 feet, the same width as the barn, high walls, and steep roof, which
make it capable of holding a great quantity of fodder, consisting last
year mostly of cornstalks, (some of which he bought very cheap of his
neighbors, while others let theirs stand in the field and this spring
raked them up and burned them,) rye straw, and oats unthrashed, all
of which he cuts and steams--sometimes with a little hay cut also and
mixed with the above articles. These are all steamed together, or each
separately, (as best suits the appetites of the cows) in a large vat,
connected with a pipe through which the steam passes from the boiler,
which stands in a room adjoining with stone or ground floor. The
chimney is of sheet-iron running up through the roof, and coal used
for fuel, renders the risk for insurance at a very low rate. The water
is supplied from a spring running into the yard, and thence through
a pipe into the boiler. The cows are also watered from the same when
the weather is stormy in winter, and they are not allowed to go out.
But to return from this digression. After the fodder is sufficiently
cooked, which takes but a short time, it is taken out into other
larger vats or troughs, with scoop shovels, and there left to cool;
then a suitable portion of Indian meal or ground rye, buck-wheat, or
oats, or any two or all four mixed and ground together, (which in my
opinion would be better,) adding a portion of ship-stuffs, shorts, or
even bran. This is the food for the cows at all seasons, except when
there is a full supply of grass. They are driven to a woods pasture for
exercise and air when there is little or no grass. Air and exercise are
indispensably necessary for the health of cows, and without these, the
milk will always be more or less unhealthy, according to the nature of
their confinement.

When the cows were brought into the yard, I was puzzled to know how
they were to be handled; but the stable doors being thrown open, each
cow entered the door nearest her stall, and went to it with as much
regularity as a young miss goes to her seat in a boarding-school. There
is a drop in the floor immediately behind the cows, 14 inches wide and
4 inches deep; into this all the excrements fall, the water running
off immediately to a reservoir prepared for the purpose of receiving
it; this, together with all the manure, was taken away daily, and
put upon the land or crops or in a heap to make compost; so that the
premises were kept perfectly clean and sweet. The floor was covered
with a thin bed of cut straw, which was passed off with the manure
as it became soiled, and by being cut, worked immediately into and
incorporated itself with the manure, without vexing the husbandman
or gardener as long green manure so frequently does. The floor behind
the cows, between the trough to catch the liquid and the wall, is six
feet wide, with strong plank platforms or tables on which to set the
vessels containing the milk. There is an open space directly over the
vat for steaming, where all the feed is cut and passed down through
a hopper into the vat; also, hoppers or spouts leading from the meal
room over head directly into the vats, which contain the steamed feed
for cooking. The mangers in which the cows are fed are broad, so that
the food may be thrown into them with scoop shovels without waste, of
which I found nothing of the kind about the whole premises. If a little
too much feed is given to one animal, and consequently left, it is
carefully scraped out and fed to one having a better appetite; thus the
mangers were kept clean and sweet. Mr. Charley feeds roots, but to what
extent I did not learn. I hope he may be induced to write you a letter,
giving a description of his cutting machine, which does its work better
than any one I have ever seen; having two blades coming together like
shears, cutting corn-stalks through their joints with as much apparent
ease as a pair of tailor's shears would cut a thread.

There is a stable for dried cows which were feeding for the butcher.
Box stalls are provided for cows about to calve; the young cattle
are kept by themselves, as are also the calves. Mr. Charley was not
at home when I visited his dairy; but this disappointment to me was
made up by the kind Mrs. C., who, with justifiable pride, showed me
her spring house with its large copper caldron for scalding her milk
tubs, pans, pails, churns, &c. &c., in the best of order, all of which
she personally superintends and looks after; and whenever there is an
overstock of milk for city customers, it is here converted into butter
of the choicest quality, and each market-day finds her at her stand
with her butter and lots of garden vegetables, the raising of which she
also superintends and takes into the city at the dawn of day. That some
families are sick and others miserably poor, is not strange, to one who
looks behind the curtain and sees what can never otherwise be described.

  S. A.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _For the American Agriculturist._




REPLY TO THE GARDENER'S CHRONICLE.

  _New-York, 14th November, 1843._


THE Gardeners' Chronicle, published in England, has the following
criticism on my essay of dock-mud, inserted in your April number of
this year, page 13:--

"We trust the editor is more correct in his other statements than in
this, concerning the percentage of sea-salt in guano, which contains
little more than a trace of it."

I have never analysed the guano, but depended on one or two analyses
given by Professor Johnston, reader of chemistry in the University
of Durham, England, in the appendix to his Lectures on Agricultural
Chemistry. He gives tables of contents of two parcels, the first
containing 30.3 per cent., the second rather more than 11 per cent.
of sea-salt. I took the larger quantity, to prove that if dock-mud
contained sea-salt, it could be no objection to it as a fertilizer.

It is highly important that the tables of analysis of celebrated
manures should be correctly given, and if the editor of the Chronicle
can furnish correct tables, he will be conferring an important boon on
the agricultural community of the whole world.

  WM. PARTRIDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _From the American Agriculturist Almanac._




SOUTHERN CALENDAR FOR DECEMBER.


THE closing month of the year is one in which every agriculturist
should take an interest, and for many useful hints we will refer the
reader to the Northern Calendar for this month.

Cotton-picking will probably occupy this month until Christmas, when
this business will have been completed, if the culture has been well
managed, and the season favorable. It would be well to start your plows
and break up ground for corn; let nothing but cotton prevent--not
even cleaning; for plowing is only one job; yet, if done soon, it is
generally advantageous, and if bad weather should set in when it must
be done, time will be lost, and a drawback ensue, whereas by plowing in
time, cleaning can be done later.

In weather not employed about other labor more important, manure and
trim all kinds of vines and fruit-trees, except the orange tribe.
Transplant evergreens and other trees, sweet briers, honeysuckles,
jasmines, &c.; sow late peas and beans, and set out onions for seed;
set all hands at work in cleaning up for other crops, picking up
limbs, grubbing, cleaning up hollows, sides of bayous, cutting down
corn-stalks with hoes, gathering materials for making manure, &c., &c.

If you do not live in the immediate vicinity, say five or six miles,
from a sugar-plantation, by all means keep bees. This can be rendered
one of the most productive branches of business of the day. Procure
a few swarms at first, and they will soon multiply to any extent
required. Use sections of hollow logs, four or five feet long, for
hives, if you have no other more convenient materials to make them
of, and allow the bees to work over the honey a second time, that you
may avoid the injurious effects in eating honey which may have been
gathered from poisonous flowers. If the above-named class of hives be
used, there will be no necessity for killing the bees; for when the
hives are filled with honey, they can be removed without harm from
the end opposite to that in which the bees are at work, and they will
immediately go to work and fill the vacancy. In most parts of the
Southern States bees maybe kept at work during the winter. If there
are not flowers for them, they can be made to work over the bad honey
collected the season before.

This is also a busy month for the sugar-planter. He will be active
in cutting and carting his cane with all possible despatch; and he
should employ one or more practical and intelligent men to conduct the
operations of the mill. In the manufacture of sugar, we know of no
better method than that given by Professor Mapes in a letter to Hon. H.
L. Ellsworth, from which we make the following extract:--

1. To cut the cane as ripe as possible, but before any acetic acid is
formed; litmus paper, touched to the fresh-cut cane, will turn red if
acid.

2. Express the juice without loss of time, as every moment after
cutting will deteriorate its quality.

3. A small quantity of clear lime-water, say one quart to a hundred
gallons of juice, should be added the moment it is expressed, unless
the juice shows acidity with litmus paper; in that case, no lime should
be used, but a solution of sal-soda or soda ash should be added, until
it is precisely neutral.

4. When the juice is neutral, free from excess of acid or alkali, it
should be evaporated in such an apparatus as would finish its charge in
30 minutes; if the boiling power is too small, good crystallization can
not possibly be obtained.

The whole time occupied, from the cutting of the cane to finishing its
boiling, should not exceed one hour.

5. To know when the boiling is finished, place a thermometer in the
kettle, and continue to evaporate until it stands at 239 deg. Fahrenheit.
If, when placed to run off after cooling, it should be found too freely
boiled, the next time boil to 240 deg., or, if too light to run off, to
238 deg., and so on.

6. The kettle or boiler should be so arranged, that the moment it is
done its charge should be thrown into a cooler, capable of holding a
number of charges. The first charge should be left in the cooler with
stirring, until the second charge is thrown in; then with an oar scrape
the crystals found on the side and bottom of the cooler loose, and
gently stir the whole mass together: the less stirred the better; so
continue at the letting in of each charge, to stir gently; and when all
is in the cooler, let the whole stand until it cools down to 175 deg.; then
fill out into sugar-moulds of a capacity not less than 14 gallons. When
cooled in the mould sufficiently, say fourteen hours, pull the plug out
of the bottom of the mould, and insert a sharp point, nearly as large
as the hole, some six inches; withdraw the point, and stand the mould
on a pot to drip.

7. If the sugar is intended to be brown, leaving it standing on the pot
for a sufficient length of time, in a temperature of 80 deg., will run off
its molasses, and leave it in a merchantable shape; it will probably
require twenty days. It can then be thrown out of the moulds, and will
be fit for use. When moulds can not be obtained, conical vessels of
wood or metal, with a hole at the apex, will answer equally well.

  D.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _From the American Agriculturist Almanac._




NORTHERN CALENDAR FOR DECEMBER.


SETTLE all your accounts, collect what is due you, and pay what
you owe. "Short settlements make long friends." Examine your farm
statistics, and see what have been the results of your experiments
with the different kinds of manures, seeds, modes of tillage, &c.,
&c.; and note them well for future use. No farmer ought to be without
such a book, in which all experiments should be carefully recorded
at the time, and the results carried into a separate book for his
own use hereafter; and if new and valuable discoveries are obtained,
communicate them to some agricultural periodical for the benefit of
the world. Recollect, you have the experience of thousands to guide
your operations, and, by contributing to the general stock whatever
may be useful, you are but returning to mankind a part of the benefits
you have derived from them. But avoid twaddle and humbuggery, and
oft-published statements, and prolix or tedious narration, and give
all the circumstances material to the subjects in the briefest,
plainest, simplest language possible. Above all things, send in your
subscription to one or more valuable agricultural papers, and get as
many of your neighbors to subscribe as possible; and consider, in so
doing, you are benefiting yourself by it ten times as much as you are
the publishers. Summer is peculiarly the time for making observations
and experiments, and winter the time for communicating them. _Remember
the poor_, not only in this month, but every month through the year,
and especially during the inclemency of winter. You need not give so
much to them outright, but endeavor to put them in a way of making
themselves comfortable, by affording them employment, by which, you may
be benefited, while doing them good. You thus confer on them a triple
benefit, by furnishing them the means of comfortable subsistence,
teaching them to help themselves, and avoiding the habit of receiving
_charity_, which insensibly weakens their sense of self-dependance.

Stock now requires increased attention: they must be well housed, or
at least protected against wind, with a shelter to which they can
resort in storms, well supplied with salt, and abundance of water,
if possible, in the yard, where they can get it when they want, and
without wearying themselves in looking for it, and wasting their
manure by dropping it in the road, or by a running stream or pond,
where it will all be lost. Their feed should be regular, and given to
them as near stated times as possible. They look for their food then
at certain hours, and are not uneasy and fretful till the customary
period arrives, when they again fill themselves, and rest quietly,
digesting their food till it is time to look for another supply. If
brought up in regular habits, brutes are much better time-keepers than
many are disposed to consider them who have not observed closely their
intelligence. Now is a good time to break steers and colts, while
the roads are smooth and hard. They ought to be early accustomed to
handling and the halter, and be gently treated, by which they are more
disposed to yield to the wishes of their master. If they have been
always used to good treatment, they will acquire a confidence in their
keepers, and the more readily submit to their guidance. 'Tis always
better to train them with strong, well-broken animals. Sympathy has
more to do with the brute creation than they have credit for generally;
and the good habits and orderly behavior of the older animals, they
have been accustomed to treat with deference, will not be without their
wholesome effect on them.

This is the best month for spreading out hemp for dew-rotting, in the
latitudes below 40 deg., as it gets a whiter and better rot than if spread
earlier.

KITCHEN-GARDEN.--Every fine day uncover the frames in which are lettuce
and cauliflower plants; otherwise they will become spindling, from want
of air. Hot-beds can now be made, for forcing asparagus for the table
in January. If the ground is open, continue trenching for spring crops.
When the ground is frozen, cart manure, repair fences, clean seeds,
prepare tools for spring. Provide pea-sticks, bean-poles, &c., and
finish all that will be required in the spring, and which can be done
when the ground is frozen.

FRUIT-GARDEN AND ORCHARD.--Finish those things which may have been
omitted the previous month. If the weather continues open, digging and
plowing may be done advantageously. Perform any work that may tend to
forward your business in the spring.

FLOWER-GARDEN AND PLEASURE-GROUNDS.--Continue to protect your beds
of bulbs, and also flower-beds and shrubs as directed in last month.
Should the weather continue open in the early part of this month, bulbs
may still be planted. They should not be left as late as this, but if
such has been the case, they had better be planted now than left until
spring. Now carefully protect seedling bulbs. The more tender kinds of
trees can have their roots protected from frost by laying manure or
long litter about them.




FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL NEWS.


BY the steamship Caledonia, we are favored by the receipt of our
European journals up to the 4th November.

MARKETS.--_Ashes_, both pots and pearls, have advanced, and were
brisk of sale. _Cotton_ had declined 1/8d. per lb. The recent advices
from Bombay and Calcutta of the East India crop, were not quite
so favorable. The stock of Cotton on hand at Liverpool on the 1st
November, was 720,000 bales, against 520,000 at same period last
season. _Flour_ was flat, and little doing in it. _Naval Stores_,
declining. _Provisions_ were about the same as by our last advices,
with the exception of Cheese, the finer qualities of which were of
quick sale. _Tobacco_, steady and firm.

_Money_ still plenty, and the low rates of interest prevail.

_American Stocks_ continue nearly the same as at our last. Very few
recent transactions.

_Agricultural School._--We see by the Berwick Warder, that an
Agricultural School is established in Aberdeenshire, by the practical
farmers of that county, which promises to be a very useful institution.
It is superintended by Mr. R. O. Young, and we like its arrangements
better than anything of the kind we have yet seen. To explain these, we
make a few quotations from the prospectus.

The young gentlemen who may be intrusted to Mr. Young's charge for the
purpose of being instructed in the principles and practice of Scottish
agriculture, will have daily opportunities of witnessing the regular
routine of farming operations going on at the farm, and of taking an
active part in these operations.

They will be required to keep, in a farm-book, a daily record of what
has been done on the farm. Explanations will be given of the principles
upon which the different operations are conducted, and upon which they
will be examined at stated times. Regular minutes will be kept by the
pupils of all such explanations, as well as of any facts that may
come to their knowledge through their occasional intercourse with the
farmers of the country.

There will be stated times set apart for reading, as text-books, the
most approved agricultural works of the day; and on the subjects of
their reading Mr. Y. will minutely examine the young gentlemen, and
will also require them to write exercises upon given agricultural
topics--particularly those that bear on practice.

While it will be Mr. Y.'s care to direct the attention of the pupils to
chemistry and geology in their application to practical agriculture,
a branch of study until lately very little attended to, he will make
arrangements for procuring the services of the professor of agriculture
in the University of Aberdeen, for a few weeks every summer, to give
lectures and conduct experiments on the analysis of soils, manures,
&c.--thus securing to the pupils more than a mere theoretical knowledge
of this important branch of agricultural education.

As nothing is so much calculated to impress any subject upon the
youthful mind, as to invest it with a _personal interest_, Mr. Y.
proposes to devote to the exclusive use of his pupils, a small farm, of
about 50 acres in extent, adjoining to his other farm. This small farm
contains a variety of soils, upon which experiments of different kinds
may be conducted, on a small scale. It will be possessed and managed by
the pupils, under Mr. Y.'s direction, and upon certain equitable rules
as to each pupil's share of the concern. Each pupil will be required
to keep regular books, exhibiting all disbursements and receipts, and
the results of all experiments tried, with every particular connected
with such experiments. Each pupil will be required to take his share
of management, &c., and the profits of the concern, after paying a
certain moderate rent, will, at each term, be divided among the young
gentlemen, in proportion to their respective interests. It is conceived
that such a plan will have a strong tendency to promote exactness,
regularity, and business habits; but, without the consent of their
parents or guardians, pupils will not be asked to join in this scheme.

FARMERS' MAGAZINE.--_Meat-Salting Instrument._--The instrument
resembles a common syringe of more than ordinary dimensions, and,
although not quite so simple in its construction, it is intended to
be used in the same way as the syringe, provided the point or tube be
not exposed to the air. The advantages to be derived from the use of
the instrument are explained by the fact that a joint of meat may,
in the simplest manner, be properly salted in less than ten minutes.
The brine is made of the usual ingredients, and after the salt and
other substances are completely dissolved, the liquid is poured into
the machine, and the nipple or tube (the circumference of which is
perforated with three small holes) is inserted into the most solid part
of a joint of meat, and the contents are, by a very strong pressure,
forced through the fibres until the brine is seen to escape on the
surface. For this purpose a smaller quantity of pickle is used than is
employed in the ordinary method of curing meat, and the bone (if there
be any,) in the centre becomes thoroughly impregnated with the fluid.
By the present mode of salting meat, it is a matter of some difficulty
to inject the brine into the innermost part of a large joint, whereas
by the process which is adopted in the use of Mr. Carson's instrument,
the size or substance of the meat presents no additional trouble to the
operator.

_Prince Albert's Annual Sale of Live Stock._--Since Prince Albert has
turned farmer, he has an annual sale of his fat stock, and is said to
realize from 50 to 60 per cent. profit on it. The last took place in
October, at which time 417 sheep, 55 oxen, and 9 cows and heifers, were
disposed of, realising him L1,743, (about $8,000;) a clever sum for fat
sheep and cattle.

_Produce of Ewes._--Count de Gourcey states in that part of his
Agricultural Tour in Europe, just received, that Mr. Walker, manager
of the late Duke of Gordon's estates, in Scotland, informed him that
from 200 Leicester ewes, and as many Southdowns, they _bring up on an
average_, 450 lambs. We wish we had possessed this information when
writing our notes to Mr. Grove's letter in this paper, as it would have
been something of an argument in our favor, regarding the difference
of opinion existing between us about the number of lambs bred in the
United States.

NEW FARMERS' JOURNAL.--_Exportation of Cattle to Prussia._--One bull
and eight heifers have been recently purchased in England, for the
Royal Agricultural Society of Prussia.

NETTING FOR SHEEP-FOLDS.--The fibre of the cocoa-nut is said to make
the most durable netting for sheep-folds; it out-wearing several sets
of tarred-hemp netting, and is so light, that a herdsman can with ease
carry 200 yards of it.

_Soiling._--Feeding animals in the summer-season with green food,
cut daily, and given them in stalls or yards, is far preferable to
grazing--First, because the food is consumed with less waste; secondly,
because rest is an equivalent for food. The bodies of animals do not
remain stationary, but are constantly wasting in proportion to the
amount of exercise they undergo--hence, while they rove at large, they
must receive from time to time new supplies in the shape of food, to
make up for this waste, which are not needed when they are at rest,
and consequently, by the system of soiling, less food will be required
to fatten them. Thirdly, because by soiling there is an increase of
valuable manure, which, by the old method of grazing, was nearly
altogether lost.

_American Provisions._--Within the last few days, 204 boxes of American
cheese have been received in Liverpool. Every year the quality of the
American cheese improves. Another article, which is arriving in very
large quantities, is American lard, which is coming into use for many
purposes for which salt and even fresh butter has been employed. Very
excellent salted beef has come from the United States in considerable
quantities.

_Epidemic among Cattle._--This has broken out again in a most virulent
shape in the north of England.

JOURNAL OF AGRICULTURE.--_Miller's Safety Reins._--These consist
of gut covered with leather, and are, therefore, proof against
fracture; and being round, and of neat light appearance, form a rather
ornamental and sporting-like appendage to harness or saddle. They are
mounted in this way:--They pass through a hook placed on the head of
the harness-bridle, and through a leather loop on the head of the
riding-bridle, and come down on each side of the neck. About middle-way
down the neck is a coupling with two swivels, which receive the reins
from the head, and they then pass through the dees of the harness, and
through the turrets of the harness-saddle, and along to the front of
the splashboard to a rein-holder, by which they are held always ready
for use. The head of the horse and the turrets of the saddle being both
higher than the throat, and the coupling being short, and having leave
to traverse the reins on each side of the neck, it settles on that part
of the throat at which the reins, on being pulled, exert the greatest
force, when, the windpipe being forcibly compressed, the horse becomes
affected in his respiration, and, therefore, stands still, or slackens
his pace for breath, which he immediately obtains on the reins being
slackened. Thus, feeling he is mastered, the horse shows no farther
inclination to run off again; but in case he should renew symptoms of
starting off, a few firm grips of the coupling on the throat will let
him feel the futility of his attempts.

In explanation of the origin of the invention, Mr. Miller stated
that he was a farmer's son, and that, in his youth, he used to be
employed at times to assist in catching horses at grass, by means of
surrounding them with a rope, borne by a person at each end of it. He
remarked that, in this service, although no restraint was laid upon the
horses when the rope rested on their chests, yet, whenever it could
be got upon their throats, they instantly stood still and allowed
themselves to be taken. The idea which this recollection suggested, of
the probable effect of pressure on the throat in stopping a runaway
horse, led Mr. Miller to the contrivance of his safety-reins. In his
first experiment, the band which connects the reins under the neck
was attached to the headstall by hooks and straps; but it has been
considered an improvement to allow it to move freely upon the reins, on
which it settles in contact with the throat, in a proper position for
use when required.

Our communications with Mr. Miller impressed us favorably in regard
to his contrivance; but, wishing to see it in practice we availed
ourselves of an offer by him to afford us an opportunity of judging
of it in operation. We, accordingly, on a day appointed, accompanied
him in a carriage drawn by one horse, for the purpose of trial; and we
witnessed as spectators, as well as made ourselves, repeated tests of
the reins, with the horse going at a smart canter, both on a level road
and on a descent, and we invariably observed that the tightening of the
reins caused the horse immediately to stop. No injurious effect seemed
to be produced on the horse by the interruption of his respiration. He
always appeared to breathe freely, and to be ready to resume his work,
as soon as the tension of the reins was relaxed.

Upon the whole, therefore, we consider Mr. Miller's invention to be a
neat and simple, as well as, to appearance, an effective contrivance
for the accomplishment of its important object, in the prevention of
the disastrous accidents which not unfrequently occur from horses
running away; and we think it reflects much credit on the ingenuity of
its inventor.

GARDENERS' CHRONICLE.--_Rhododendron._--There is a variety of the
Rhododendron ponticum growing here, which appears to be different from
any of the others. It comes into flower about the same time as the
others, but instead of unfolding its blossoms at the same rate as its
neighbors, it only opens a few at a time, and continues long in flower.
It did not cease flowering this season the whole month of August;
consequently was nearly a month longer in bloom than the others. It has
a southern exposure, and is sheltered from the north and east.

_Blight on Grain from the Barberry._--In the Chronicle of August 19,
under the head of "Vulgar Errors," we read as follows: "People still
maintain that the barberry blights their grain." This is, nevertheless,
a matter deserving attention; for in this, as in many other instances,
a popular prejudice has been founded on truth, although the real cause
has been often overlooked. Some writers have treated this subject with
respect, and among them is Dr. Thornton. The latter says that the
"leaves are very subject to the _rubigo_, which will infect the grain
in the neighborhood." Here the secret is at once explained, and the
aversion of farmers to the barberry-bush at once justified. The vulgar
notion is, that the barberry exercises some evil agency upon grain
within a certain distance, and accordingly farmers will never suffer it
to grow near their fields. They are right as to the effect, but they
attribute it to a wrong cause. I have seen some remarkable instances
of grain perishing in a semicircle, in front of a barberry-bush, and
extending a good way into a field. Any one who has but superficially
noticed the barberry, must have observed that the leaves and young
shoots of the shrub were covered with a peculiar kind of blight or
mildew. Now it is by no means extraordinary that this should be carried
by the wind into grain-fields, and infect the grain so as to cause its
destruction. This is the true explanation of the mischief caused by the
barberry to grain in its neighborhood. [This is the common explanation,
but if any one will take the trouble to examine the parasitical plant
which attacks the barberry, and that of grain, he will find that they
are totally different things. One is the AEcidium Berberidis, and the
other some species of Uredo or Puccinia, for it is sometimes one and
sometimes the other. We should as soon believe that a hen's egg would
be hatched into toads, as that the seed of an AEcidium would produce an
Uredo or Puccinia. We are aware of the facts mentioned by Mr. Wighton,
for we have seen them ourselves, and they form a curious problem yet to
solve.]




REVIEW OF THE MARKET.

PRICES CURRENT IN NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 28, 1843.


  ASHES, Pots,              per 100 lbs.      $4 62      to  $4 68
      Pearls,                        do.       5 12      "    5 18
  BACON SIDES, Smoked,           per lb.          31/2     "       41/2
      In pickle                      do.          3      "       4
  BALE ROPE                          do.          6      "       9
  BARK, Quercitron               per ton      23 00      "   24 50
  BARLEY                       per bush.         52      "      56
  BEANS, White                       do.       1 121/2     "    1 25
  BEEF, Mess                    per bbl.       6 00      "    7 00
      Prime                          do.       4 00      "    5 00
      Smoked                     per lb.          6      "       71/2
      Rounds, in pickle              do.          4      "       51/2
  BEESWAX, Am. Yellow                do.         28      "      30
  BOLT ROPE                          do.         12      "      13
  BRISTLES, American                 do.         25      "      65
  BUTTER, Table                      do.         12      "      15
      Shipping                       do.          6      "      10
  CANDLES, Mould, Tallow             do.          9      "      12
      Sperm                          do.         32      "      38
      Stearic                        do.         20      "      25
  CHEESE                             do.          4      "       7
  CIDER BRANDY, Eastern         per gal.         35      "      40
      Western                        do.         28      "      35
  CLOVER SEED                    per lb.          81/2     "       91/2
  COAL, Anthracite             2000 lbs.       5 00      "    6 00
      Sidney and Pictou        per chal.       7 00      "    7 50
  CORDAGE, American              per lb.         11      "      12
  CORN, Northern               per bush.         56      "      58
      Southern                       do.         54      "      56
  COTTON                         per lb.          6      "      11
  COTTON BAGGING, Amer. hemp   per yard.         16      "      18
      American Flax                  do.         15      "      16
  FEATHERS                       per lb.         27      "      31
  FLAX, American                     do.          8      "       81/2
  FLAX SEED, rough           per 7 bush.       8 75      "    9 00
      clean                          do.      -- --      "  --  --
  FLOUR, Northern and Western   per bbl.       4 56      "    4 75
      Fancy                          do.       5 50      "    5 621/2
      Southern                  per bbl.       4 50      "    4 75
      Richmond City Mills            do.       5 50      "    5 62
      Rye                            do.       3 00      "    3 12
  HAMS, Smoked                   per lb.          5      "       71/2
      Pickled                        do.          4      "       5
  HAY                       per 100 lbs.         40      "      45
  HIDES, Dry Southern            per lb.          9      "      11
  HEMP, Russia, clean           per ton.     185 00      "  190 00
      American, water-rotted         do.     140 00      "  180 00
         do     dew-rotted           do.      90 00      "  140 00
  HOPS                           per lb.          6      "       8
  HORNS                          per 100       1 25      "    5 00
  LARD                           per lb.          51/2     "       7
  LEAD                               do.          31/2     "       4
      Sheet and bar                  do.          4      "       41/2
  MEAL, Corn                    per bbl.       2 75      "    3 00
      Corn                      per hhd.      12 50      "   13 00
  MOLASSES, New Orleans         per gal.         23      "      25
  MUSTARD, American              per lb.         16      "      31
  OATS, Northern               per bush.         30      "      32
      Southern                       do.         26      "      28
  OIL, Linseed, American        per gal.         75      "      80
      Castor                         do.         90      "    1 00
      Lard                           do.         55      "      65
  OIL CAKE                  per 100 lbs.       1 00      "   -- --
  PEAS, Field                  per bush.       1 25      "   -- --
  PITCH                         per bbl.       1 121/2     "    1 37
  PLASTER OF PARIS              per ton.       2 00      "    2 25
      Ground, in bbls.          per cwt.         50      "   -- --
  PORK, Mess                    per bbl.      10 50      "   11 38
      Prime                          do.       9 25      "   10 12
  RICE                      per 100 lbs.       2 75      "    3 12
  ROSIN                         per bbl.         65      "      95
  RYE                          per bush.         65      "      66
  SALT                          per sack       1 35      "    1 50
  SHOULDERS, Smoked              per lb.          3      "       41/2
      Pickled                        do.          3      "       4
  SPIRITS TURPENTINE, Southern  per gal.         38      "      40
  SUGAR, New Orleans             per lb.          6      "       71/2
  SUMAC, American                per ton      25 00      "   27 50
  TALLOW                         per lb.          7      "       71/2
  TAR                           per bbl.       1 25      "    1 50
  TIMOTHY SEED               per 7 bush.      13 00      "   14 00
  TOBACCO                        per lb.          3      "       61/2
  TURPENTINE                    per bbl.       2 62      "    2 87
  WHEAT, Western               per bush.       1 00      "    1 05
      Southern                       do.         90      "    1 00
  WHISKEY, American             per gal.         23      "      25
  WOOL, Saxony                   per lb.         35      "      50
      Merino                         do.         30      "      35
      Half-blood                     do.         25      "      27
      Common                         do.         18      "      22


ADVERTISEMENTS


New York Cattle Market--November 27.

At market, 1,150 beef Cattle, (110 from the south), 35 Cows and Calves,
and 2,350 Sheep and Lambs.

PRICES.--_Beef Cattle_ have slightly improved, and we quote $4.25 a $5
to $5.25 a $5.50 for the best. 1,101 unsold.

_Cows and Calves._--All taken at $18 a $27.

_Sheep and Lambs._--Sales of Lambs at $1 a $2, and of Sheep at 1.371/2 a
$3.50. 100 unsold.

_Hay_.--Sales at 621/2 a 75 cents per cwt.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMARKS.--_Ashes_, since the late news from Europe, have been in good
request. _Candles_, especially those made of stearic, are brisk.
_Cotton_. The day after the arrival of the Caledonia with advices of
a fall in England, this article receded nearly 1/4 of a cent per lb.;
but a brisk demand springing up for export, it has recovered, and is
about the same now as before the reception of the late news. We hear
nothing particularly new from the south regarding the picking, the
weather upon the whole supposed to be more favorable. Export from the
United States since 1st September last, 62,450 bales; same time last
year, 113,301; same time year before, 99,904. _Flour_. The continued
navigation on the canals, has brought us an unprecedented supply,
and a large quantity has gone into store; a good business, however,
continues to be done in it. The total arrivals this season have been
1,440,000 brls. _Rye-flour_ is dull. _Buckwheat_, very scarce and
advancing. _Cornmeal_, dull. _Wheat_ is in good demand, and prices
stiff. _Rye_, declining. _Barley_, _Oats_, and _Corn_, in fair demand.
_Hemp_, dull. _Hops_, improving. _Molasses_, not much inquired for.
_Beef_ and _Pork_, quiet, and little doing at present in them. _Lard_,
much wanted. _Hogs_. Extreme rates now in Cincinnati are from $2.25
to $2.75; we are free to repeat, however, that we believe the first
quality of hogs will be worth $3 by Christmas. _Rice_, of the better
qualities, scarce. _Seeds_, especially Timothy, in good request.
_Sugar_, quite inactive. _Tobacco_, fine Kentucky, scarce and wanted;
stems, none in market. _Wool_ seems to have taken a fresh start again,
and prices have an upward tendency.

_Stocks_. A large business continues to be done in these, and they are
still gradually advancing.

_Money_ plenty, and seeking investment at the usual low rates.

_Real Estate_ seems at last to have come into demand, and considerable
sales in this species of property have recently taken place at good
prices. It must henceforth advance. Our population and wealth have
increased in an unprecedented ratio within the past four years, and
there is no reason why real estate should remain at its late low
prices, and transactions in it any longer stagnant.

_Business generally_, the past season, has been extremely good; and
we do not hesitate to say, few years can show a greater amount of
substantial profits. We consider the days of darkness as passed, and we
may now look forward to the future with the brightest anticipations.

_Packing Pork._--On this subject we quote from the Cincinnati Chronicle
of 22d November. For the benefit of our distant readers, who may
be disposed to send their orders here for pork, we give below the
pork-merchant's prices for _packing_ this season, based upon 60 cents
per bushel for Turk-Island salt, 871/2 cents for bbls., 28 cents per
bushel for Kenhawa fine salt, and 75 cents to $1.50 per day, for
laborers. For receiving, weighing, and cutting the hogs, a block-fee of
5 cents each.

For packing per bbl., including all charges, $1.60 _a_ $1.75. For
salting 100 lbs. in bulk, including saltpetre for the joints, $1.62
_a_ $1.75. Smoking per 1.000 lbs., including washing, $1.25. Rendering
lard, 37 _a_ 50 cents per 100 lbs., which does not include the price of
the keg or barrel--2 to 5 cents is also charged on each keg or barrel,
for nailing the hoops, boring, weighing, and marking. The cooperage is
charged at cost.




TO CORRESPONDENTS.


--A. B. Your package of Essays is sent to T. C. R. of P., as directed,
and we have written you in full in it. The sheep-articles shall be
condensed as you suggest, if we can possibly find room, and papers
in any event sent to the gentlemen whose names are given. Good
South-Downs, or Merinos, can be had from $10 to $20 each. It is not
worth while to transport lower-priced animals such a distance. For
Rambouillets, $30 to $50 each. See Mr. Collins' letter, Sept. No., page
166.

Henry A. Field, J. W. Stuart, S. B. Parsons, James Bates, and D. K.
Minor, in our next.




ACKNOWLEDGMENT.


--From some unknown friend, we have received a tin case containing two
fine paintings of cattle, sheep, &c. We should be pleased to know to
whom we are indebted for these, for no note accompanied them, and we
can hardly guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

BLACK GALLOWAY CATTLE.

A pure-bred imported cow, and a bull of the Galloway or Kyloe breed of
Scotch Highland cattle, are for sale in this vicinity. These animals
are very fine of their kind, and were chosen from one of the most
celebrated breeders of this stock in Scotland. The cow took several
prizes at the agricultural shows before being shipped to this country,
and gives a superior quality of milk. The bull is quite equal to the
cow, and they will be sold at a reasonable price.

Apply, post paid, to the Editor of this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

FARMING LANDS FOR SALE.

For sale, about 500 acres of choice farming lands, lying on the Erie
canal and Niagara river, 5 miles from Buffalo, and one mile below the
Hydraulic Works in Black Rock. There is a due proportion of cleared
and timber land, and the soil is equally adapted for grain, grass, and
roots. Its proximity to an extensive and growing market, as well as the
convenience, beauty, and healthfulness of the location, render this one
of the most desirable situations in western New York. The most liberal
credit will be given to purchasers.

  Address, post paid, R. L. ALLEN, 156 Main st., Buffalo.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINNAEAN BOTANIC GARDEN AND NURSERY--LATE PRINCE'S.

FLUSHING, L. I., NEAR NEW YORK.

The New Descriptive Catalogue, not only of Fruit, but also of
Ornamental Trees, Shrubs, and Plants, cultivated and for sale at this
ancient and celebrated Nursery (known as Prince's, and by the above
title for nearly fifty years), with directions for their culture, may
be had _gratis_ on application to the new proprietors by mail, post
paid. The collection at this establishment is unrivalled, and prices
generally very much reduced; and the proprietors flatter themselves
that the catalogue will be found to surpass in extent of information
and usefulness, anything of the kind ever before presented to the
public, and to be worthy of a permanent place in the library of the
horticulturist. Orders will be promptly executed.

  WINTER & Co., Proprietors.

  Flushing, Oct. 24th, 1843.

       *       *       *       *       *

A STOCK MAN WANTED TO GO SOUTH.

A planter, in the state of Georgia, wishes to engage a faithful
competent man to take charge of his stock. If he be married, and his
wife be a good dairywoman, she will also find employment. The situation
is in the interior of the country, and quite healthy. None need apply
if above middle age, or who have not had some experience in their
business in this country, and can bring the best of references.

Address the Editor of this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUSINESS AGENCY.

The Subscriber will attend promptly to the execution of all orders for
the purchase of stock, agricultural implements, or merchandise of any
kind; also the negotiation of loans, sales of lands, payment of taxes,
&c. He has been more or less engaged in mercantile pursuits in this
city for ten years, and has an extensive acquaintance with moneyed men,
and a thorough knowledge of business in general. Cash or produce must
invariably be in hand, before orders for purchases can be executed.

  A. B. ALLEN.

  205 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHEAP CASH BOOKSTORE,

205 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Saxton & Miles, Publishers, and dealers in Books in every department of
Literature, at very reduced prices for _cash_.

S. & M. publish the following Book, which should be in every family in
the United States: GUNN'S DOMESTIC MEDICINE, or the Poor Man's Friend.

Among the many publications of more than doubtful utility, with which
our presses groan, it is pleasant to offer to the public one which,
while it can not injure the mental and moral powers, is capable of
improving our health and prolonging our days. It is now about ten years
since this work was first published, since which time it has passed
through many large editions, and the astonishing number of _one hundred
thousand_ copies has been sold in the southern and western states, and
the demand is increasing.

It has just been revised and corrected, containing 900 pages, and
executed in superior style. People may be disposed to smile when we
tell them that they can save money by purchasing this book, but we
think we can satisfy them that such is the fact, In every family more
or less is paid yearly for doctor's bills. A child is taken with a
fever, or some other complaint, and from ignorance nothing is or can
be done effectually to check it. The physician is called, and a large
bill is contracted; whereas, had GUNN'S DOMESTIC MEDICINE been on
hand, a remedy could easily have been found which would have checked
the disease in its first stage, and not only have saved the purse, but
perhaps the life.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Agriculturist Almanac for 1844.

This work comprises 64 pages, double columns octavo, with numerous
wood cuts, price $8 per hundred, 121/2 cents each. In the contents
will be found--Agricultural Statistics of the United States--Aspects
and Nodes--Astronomical Calendars for Montreal, Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, Charleston, and New Orleans--Characters and Names of the
Planets, &c.--Farmers' Northern Calendars, with particular directions
for the management of the Farm, Cattle, Fruit and Flower Garden,
&c.--Southern Calendars for the Planter and Farmer, with explicit
directions for the culture and harvesting of Cotton, Rice, Tobacco,
&c., &c.




THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST.


Published Monthly, each number containing 32 pages, royal octavo.

TERMS--One Dollar per year in advance; single numbers, Ten Cents; three
copies for Two Dollars; eight copies for Five Dollars.

Each number of the Agriculturist contains but One sheet, subject to
newspaper postage only, which is _one cent_ in the State, or within
100 miles of its publication, and _one and a half cents_, if over 100
miles, without the State.

ADVERTISEMENTS will be inserted at One Dollar, if not exceeding twelve
lines, and in the same proportion, if exceeding that number.

[Symbol] _Remit through Postmasters, as the law allows._

Editors of Newspapers noticing the numbers of this work monthly, or
advertising it, will be furnished a copy gratis, upon sending such
notice to this Office.

Volume I of THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST, with table of contents
complete, for sale at $1; handsomely bound in cloth, $1 25. It is a
neat and tasteful book, and makes a handsome premium for distribution
with Agricultural Societies; to which, when several copies are ordered,
a liberal discount will be made.

[Symbol] To prevent confusion, all letters merely ordering this work,
or enclosing money for subscriptions, should be addressed to Saxton &
Miles, 205 Broadway, post-paid or franked by the Postmaster.

Communications for publication, to be directed to the Editor; and all
_private_ letters, or those on business disconnected with the paper,
should be addressed, simply, A. B. Allen, 205 Broadway. New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

STOCK FOR SALE.

R. H. Hendrickson & Co., of Middletown, Butler county, Ohio, will
promptly attend to orders for Short-Horn Cattle, Bakewell, Merino,
South-Down, and Saxon Sheep; also for Berkshire pigs from Windsor
Castle, imported from England, and twenty choice Berkshire sows, a part
of which were also imported. Windsor Castle stands 3 feet high, and is
estimated by competent judges to weigh 1000 lbs. Pigs of crosses with
the imported Kenilworth, the large Miami, Byfield, and Grazier stocks,
will likewise be furnished.

None but choice specimens of any of the above stock will be supplied,
and at prices corresponding with the times. Address, post paid, as
above.

Oct. 12th, 1843.

  R. H. HENDRICKSON & Co.




AGENTS FOR THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST.

  John Halsall, Bookseller, St. Louis, Mo.
  G. S. Taintor, Bookseller, Natchez, Miss.
  S. F. Gale & Co., Chicago, Ill.
  John J. Herrick, Detroit, Mich.
  J. B. Steele, New Orleans.
  C. M. Hovey, Boston, Mass.
  Saxton, Peirce, & Co., Boston.
  Arthur D. Phelps, Boston.
  R. H. Hendrickson, Middletown, Ohio
  Andrew Campbell.
  E. Cornell, Ithaca, N. Y.
  H. Kirkland, Northampton, Mass.
  John Bonner, White Plains, Georgia.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS OF DECEMBER NUMBER.

EDITORIAL.

                                                              Page.

    Fattening Poultry,                                          321
    Fertility of Sea-Mud,                                       322
    Sketches of the West, No. 2,                                323
    Breeds of Fowls,           }                                325
    New York Farmers' Club,    }
    Next Annual Show of the State Ag. Society,                  327
    Tour in England, No. 15,                                    328
    Agricultural Shows,                                         330
    Sale of Rambouillet Merinos,                             }
    Price of Sheep Dogs,                                     }
    Annual Meeting of the New York State Ag. Society,        }  332
    List of Premiums of the American Institute (continued),  }
    Foreign Agricultural News,                                  349
    Review of the Market,  }
    To Correspondents,     }                                    351
    Acknowledgment,        }
    Terms and list of Agents,                                   352

EXTRACTS.

    Making Capons,                                              334
    Grafting and Budding,                                       335
    High Cranberry,                                             339

ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.

    H. D. Grove, Fine-Wool Sheep,                               340
    R. B. C, Sea-Mud as a Fertilizer,                           341
    Henry Meigs, Farm of Hugh Maxwell, Esq.,                    342
    Robert L. Wright, Mediterranean Wheat, }
    C. McD., Topping Cotton-Marl,          }                    343
    R. L. Allen, Hints on the Cultivation of Wheat,             344
    S. A., A Pennsylvania Dairy,                                346
    Wm. Partridge, Reply to the Gardeners' Chronicle,    }      347
    Amer. Ag. Almanac, Southern Calendar for December,   }
      do.        do.   Northern   do.          do.              348




                    Transcribers notes:

  A mixture of archaic and modern spelling is used. For example;
  visiters and visitors. This is retained.

  Inconsistent hyphenation is retained.

  Italics are shown thus: _sloping_.

  Small capitals have been capitalised.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Agriculturist. Vol. II.
No. XI, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST. ***

***** This file should be named 59579.txt or 59579.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/5/7/59579/

Produced by Alan and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

