Project Gutenberg's The British North America Act, 1867, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The British North America Act, 1867

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: September 28, 2004 [EBook #5984]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT ***




This eBook was produced by Andrew Sly.






THE BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT, 1867.


30 VICTORIA, CHAPTER 3.


An Act for the Union of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick,
and the Government thereof; and for Purposes connected therewith.

                                   [29th March, 1867.]


Whereas the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick have
expressed their Desire to be federally united into One Dominion under
the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, with a
Constitution similar in Principle to that of the United Kingdom:

And whereas such a Union would conduce to the Welfare of the Provinces
and promote the Interests of the British Empire:

And whereas on the Establishment of the Union by Authority of Parliament
it is expedient, not only that the Constitution of the Legislative
Authority in the Dominion be provided for, but also that the Nature of
the Executive Government therein be declared:

And whereas it is expedient that Provision be made for the eventual
Admission into the Union of other Parts of British North America:

Be it therefore enacted and declared by the Queen's most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, as follows:



    I.--PRELIMINARY.


1. [Short Title.] This Act may be cited as The British North America
Act, 1867.


2. [Application of Provisions referring to the Queen.] The Provisions of
this Act referring to Her Majesty the Queen extend also to the Heirs and
Successors of Her Majesty, Kings and Queens of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland.



    II.--UNION.


3. [Declaration of Union] It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with
the Advice of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, to declare by
Proclamation that, on and after a Day therein appointed, not being more
than Six Months after the passing of this Act, the Provinces of Canada,
Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick shall form and be One Dominion under the
Name of Canada; and on and after that Day those Three Provinces shall
form and be One Dominion under that Name accordingly.

4. [Construction of subsequent Provisions of Act.] The subsequent
Provisions of this Act shall, unless it is otherwise expressed or
implied, commence and have effect on and after the Union, that is to
say, on and after the Day appointed for the Union taking effect in the
Queen's Proclamation; and in the same Provisions, unless it is otherwise
expressed or implied, the Name Canada shall be taken to mean Canada as
constituted under this Act.

5. [Four Provinces.] Canada shall be divided into Four Provinces, named
Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick.

6. [Provinces of Ontario and Quebec.] The Parts of the Province of
Canada (as it exists at the passing of this Act) which formerly
constituted respectively the Provinces of Upper Canada and Lower Canada
shall be deemed to be severed, and shall form two separate Provinces.
The Part which formerly constituted the Province of Upper Canada shall
constitute the Province of Ontario; and the Part which formerly
constituted the Province of Lower Canada shall constitute the Province
of Quebec.

7. [Provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.] The Provinces of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick shall have the same Limits as at the passing of
this Act.


8. [Decennial Census.] In the general Census of the Population of Canada
which is hereby required to be taken in the Year One thousand eight
hundred and seventy-one, and in every Tenth Year thereafter, the
respective Populations of the Four Provinces shall be distinguished.



    III.--EXECUTIVE POWER.


9. [Declaration of Executive Power in the Queen.] The Executive
Government and Authority of and over Canada is hereby declared to
continue and be vested in the Queen.

10. [Application of Provisions referring to Governor General.] The
Provisions of this Act referring to the Governor General extend and
apply to the Governor General for the Time being of Canada, or other the
Chief Executive Officer or Administrator for the Time being carrying on
the Government of Canada on behalf and in the Name of the Queen, by
whatever Title he is designated.

11. [Constitution of Privy Council for Canada.] There shall be a Council
to aid and advise in the Government of Canada, to be styled the Queen's
Privy Council for Canada; and the Persons who are to be Members of that
Council shall be from Time to Time chosen and summoned by the Governor
General and sworn in as Privy Councillors, and Members thereof may be
from Time to Time removed by the Governor General.


12. [All Powers under Acts to be exercised by Governor General with
Advice of Privy Council, or alone.] All Powers, Authorities, and
Functions which under any Act of the Parliament of Great Britain, or of
the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or
of the Legislature of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, Canada, Nova Scotia,
or New Brunswick, are at the Union vested in or exerciseable by the
respective Governors or Lieutenant Governors of those Provinces, with
the Advice, or with the Advice and Consent, of the respective Executive
Councils thereof, or in conjunction with those Councils, or with any
Number of Members thereof, or by those Governors or Lieutenant Governors
individually, shall, as far as the same continue in existence and
capable of being exercised after the Union in relation to the Government
of Canada, be vested in and exerciseable by the Governor General, with
the Advice or with the Advice and Consent of or in conjunction with
the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, or any Members thereof, or by
the Governor General individually, as the Case requires, subject
nevertheless (except with respect to such as exist under Acts of the
Parliament of Great Britain or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland) to be abolished or altered by the
Parliament of Canada.


13. [Application of Provisions referring to Governor General in
Council.] The Provisions of this Act referring to the Governor General
in Council shall be construed as referring to the Governor General
acting by and with the Advice of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada.

14. [Power to Her Majesty to authorize Governor General to appoint
Deputies.] It shall be lawful for the Queen, if Her Majesty thinks fit,
to authorize the Governor General from Time to Time to appoint any
Person or any Persons jointly or severally to be his Deputy or Deputies
within any Part or Parts of Canada, and in that Capacity to exercise
during the Pleasure of the Governor General such of the Powers,
Authorities, and Functions of the Governor General as the Governor
General deems it necessary or expedient to assign to him or them,
subject to any Limitations or Directions expressed or given by the
Queen; but the Appointment of such a Deputy or Deputies shall not affect
the Exercise by the Governor General himself of any Power, Authority, or
Function.

15. [Command of Armed Forces to continue to be vested in the Queen.] The
Command-in-Chief of the Land and Naval Militia, and of all Naval and
Military Forces, of and in Canada, is hereby declared to continue and be
vested in the Queen.

16. [Seat of Government of Canada.] Until the Queen otherwise directs
the Seat of Government of Canada shall be Ottawa.



    IV.--LEGISLATIVE POWER.


17. [Constitution of Parliament of Canada.] There shall be One
Parliament for Canada, consisting of the Queen, an Upper House styled
the Senate, and the House of Commons.

18. [Privileges, &c. of Houses.] The Privileges, Immunities, and Powers
to be held, enjoyed, and exercised by the Senate and by the House of
Commons and by the Members thereof respectively shall be such as are
from Time to Time defined by Act of the Parliament of Canada, but so
that the same shall never exceed those at the passing of this Act held,
enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and by the Members thereof.

19. [First Session of the Parliament of Canada.] The Parliament of
Canada shall be called together not later than Six Months after the
Union.

20. [Yearly Session of the Parliament of Canada.] There shall be a
Session of the Parliament of Canada once at least in every Year, so that
Twelve Months shall not intervene between the last Sitting of the
Parliament in one Session and its first Sitting in the next Session.


The Senate.


21. [Number of Senators.] The Senate shall, subject to the Provisions
of this Act, consist of Seventy-two Members, who shall be styled
Senators.

22. [Representation of Provinces in Senate.] In relation to the
Constitution of the Senate, Canada shall be deemed to consist of Three
Divisions:

  1. Ontario;
  2. Quebec;
  3. The Maritime Provinces, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick;

which Three Divisions shall (subject to the Provisions of this Act) be
equally represented in the Senate as follows: Ontario by Twenty-four
Senators; Quebec by Twenty-four Senators; and the Maritime Provinces
by Twenty-four Senators, Twelve thereof representing Nova Scotia, and
Twelve thereof representing New Brunswick.

In the Case of Quebec each of the Twenty-four Senators representing
that Province shall be appointed for One of the Twenty-four Electoral
Divisions of Lower Canada specified in Schedule A. to Chapter One of
the Consolidated Statutes of Canada.


23. [Qualifications of Senator.] The Qualifications of a Senator shall
be as follows:

(1.) He shall be of the full age of Thirty Years:
(2.) He shall be either a Natural-born Subject of the Queen, or a
     Subject of the Queen naturalized by an Act of the Parliament of
     Great Britain, or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great
     Britain and Ireland, or of the Legislature of One of the Provinces
     of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, Canada, Nova Scotia, or New
     Brunswick, before the Union, or of the Parliament of Canada after
     the Union:
(3.) He shall be legally or equitably seised as of Freehold for his own
     Use and Benefit of Lands or Tenements held in Free and Common
     Socage, or seised or possessed for his own Use and Benefit of Lands
     or Tenements held in Franc-alleu or in Roture, within the Province
     for which he is appointed, of the Value of Four thousand Dollars,
     over and above all Rents, Dues, Debts, Charges, Mortgages, and
     Incumbrances due or payable out of or charged on or affecting the
     same:
(4.) His Real and Personal Property shall be together worth Four
     thousand Dollars over and above his Debts and Liabilities:
(5.) He shall be resident in the Province for which he is appointed:
(6.) In the case of Quebec he shall have his Real Property Qualification
     in the Electoral Division for which he is appointed, or shall be
     resident in that Division.

24. [Summons of Senator.] The Governor General shall from Time to Time,
in the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada,
summon qualified Persons to the Senate; and, subject to the Provisions
of this Act, every Person so summoned shall become and be a Member of
the Senate and a Senator.

25. [Summons of First Body of Senators.] Such Persons shall be first
summoned to the Senate as the Queen by Warrant under Her Majesty's Royal
Sign Manual thinks fit to approve, and their Names shall be inserted in
the Queen's Proclamation of Union.

26. [Addition of Senators in certain Cases.] If at any Time on the
Recommendation of the Governor General the Queen thinks fit to direct
that Three or Six Members be added to the Senate, the Governor General
may by Summons to Three or Six qualified Persons (as the Case may be),
representing equally the Three Divisions of Canada, add to the Senate
accordingly.


27. [Reduction of Senate to normal number.] In case of such Addition
being at any Time made, the Governor General shall not summon any Person
to the Senate, except on a further like Direction by the Queen on the
like Recommendation, until each of the Three Divisions of Canada is
represented by Twenty-four Senators and no more.

28. [Maximum Number of Senators.] The Number of Senators shall not at
any Time exceed Seventy-eight.

29. [Tenure of Place in Senate.] A Senator shall, subject to the
Provisions of this Act, hold his Place in the Senate for Life.

30. [Resignation of Place in Senate.] A Senator may by Writing under his
Hand addressed to the Governor General resign his Place in the Senate,
and thereupon the same shall be vacant.

31. [Disqualification of Senators.] The Place of a Senator shall become
vacant in any of the following Cases:--

(1.) If for Two consecutive Sessions of the Parliament he fails to give
     his Attendance in the Senate:
(2.) If he takes an Oath or makes a Declaration or Acknowledgment of
     Allegiance, Obedience, or Adherence to a Foreign Power, or does an
     Act whereby he becomes a Subject or Citizen, or entitled to the
     Rights or Privileges of a Subject or Citizen, of a Foreign Power:
(3.) If he is adjudged Bankrupt or Insolvent, or applies for the Benefit
     of any Law relating to Insolvent Debtors, or becomes a public
     Defaulter:
(4.) If he is attainted of Treason or convicted of Felony or of any
     infamous Crime:
(5.) If he ceases to be qualified in respect of Property or of
     Residence; provided, that a Senator shall not be deemed to have
     ceased to be qualified in respect of Residence by reason only of
     his residing at the Seat of the Government of Canada while holding
     an Office under that Government requiring his Presence there.

32. [Summons on Vacancy in Senate.] When a Vacancy happens in the Senate
by Resignation, Death, or otherwise, the Governor General shall by
Summons to a fit and qualified Person fill the Vacancy.

33. [Questions as to Qualifications and Vacancies in Senate.] If any
Question arises respecting the Qualification of a Senator or a Vacancy
in the Senate the same shall be heard and determined by the Senate.


34. [Appointment of Speaker of Senate.] The Governor General may from
Time to Time, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada, appoint a
Senator to be Speaker of the Senate, and may remove him and appoint
another in his Stead.

35. [Quorum of Senate.] Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise
provides, the Presence of at least Fifteen Senators, including the
Speaker, shall be necessary to constitute a Meeting of the Senate for
the Exercise of its Powers.

36. [Voting in Senate.] Questions arising in the Senate shall be decided
by a Majority of Voices, and the Speaker shall in all Cases have a Vote,
and when the Voices are equal the Decision shall be deemed to be in the
Negative.


The House of Commons.


37. [Constitution of House of Commons in Canada.] The House of Commons
shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, consist of One hundred and
eighty-one Members, of whom Eighty-two shall be elected for Ontario,
Sixty-five for Quebec, Nineteen for Nova Scotia, and Fifteen for New
Brunswick.


38. [Summoning of House of Commons.] The Governor General shall from
Time to Time, in the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of
Canada, summon and call together the House of Commons.

39. [Senators not to sit in House of Commons.] A Senator shall not be
capable of being elected or of sitting or voting as a Member of the
House of Commons.

40. [Electoral Districts of the Four Provinces.] Until the Parliament
of Canada otherwise provides, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New
Brunswick shall, for the Purposes of the Election of Members to serve in
the House of Commons, be divided into Electoral Districts as follows:

1.--ONTARIO.

Ontario shall be divided into the Counties, Ridings of Counties, Cities,
Parts of Cities, and Towns enumerated in the First Schedule to this Act,
each whereof shall be an Electoral District, each such District as
numbered in that Schedule being entitled to return One Member.

2.--QUEBEC.

Quebec shall be divided into Sixty-five Electoral Districts, composed
of the Sixty-five Electoral Divisions into which Lower Canada is at
the passing of this Act divided under Chapter Two of the Consolidated
Statutes of Canada, Chapter Seventy-five of the Consolidated Statutes
for Lower Canada, and the Act of the Province of Canada of the
Twenty-third Year of the Queen, Chapter One, or any other Act amending
the same in force at the Union, so that each such Electoral Division
shall be for the Purposes of this Act an Electoral District entitled
to return One Member.

3.--NOVA SCOTIA.

Each of the Eighteen Counties of Nova Scotia shall be an Electoral
District. The County of Halifax shall be entitled to return Two Members,
and each of the other Counties One Member.

4.--NEW BRUNSWICK.

Each of the Fourteen Counties into which New Brunswick is divided,
including the City and County of St. John, shall be an Electoral
District; The City of St. John shall also be a separate Electoral
District. Each of those Fifteen Electoral Districts shall be entitled
to return One Member.

41. [Continuance of existing Election Laws until Parliament of Canada
otherwise provides.] Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides,
all Laws in force in the several Provinces at the Union relative to
the following Matters or any of them, namely,--the Qualifications and
Disqualifications of Persons to be elected or to sit or vote as Members
of the House of Assembly or Legislative Assembly in the several
Provinces, the Voters at Elections of such Members, the Oaths to be
taken by Voters, the Returning Officers, their Powers and Duties, the
Proceedings at Elections, the Periods during which Elections may be
continued, the Trial of controverted Elections, and Proceedings incident
thereto, the vacating of Seats of Members, and the Execution of new
Writs in case of Seats vacated otherwise than by Dissolution,--shall
respectively apply to Elections of Members to serve in the House of
Commons for the same several Provinces.

Provided that, until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, at
any Election for a Member of the House of Commons for the District of
Algoma, in addition to Persons qualified by the Law of the Province of
Canada to vote, every male British Subject, aged Twenty-one Years or
upwards, being a Householder, shall have a Vote.

42. [Writs for First Election.] For the First Election of Members to
serve in the House of Commons the Governor General shall cause Writs to
be issued by such Person, in such Form, and addressed to such Returning
Officers as he thinks fit.

The Person issuing Writs under this Section shall have the like Powers
as are possessed at the Union by the Officers charged with the issuing
of Writs for the Election of Members to serve in the respective House of
Assembly or Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada, Nova Scotia,
or New Brunswick; and the Returning Officers to whom Writs are directed
under this Section shall have the like Powers as are possessed at the
Union by the Officers charged with the returning of Writs for the
Election of Members to serve in the same respective House of Assembly
or Legislative Assembly.


43. [As to Casual Vacancies.] In case a Vacancy in the Representation
in the House of Commons of any Electoral District happens before the
Meeting of the Parliament, or after the Meeting of the Parliament before
Provision is made by the Parliament in this Behalf, the Provisions of
the last foregoing Section of this Act shall extend and apply to the
issuing and returning of a Writ in respect of such Vacant District.

44. [As to Election of Speaker of House of Commons.] The House of
Commons on its first assembling after a General Election shall proceed
with all practicable Speed to elect One of its Members to be Speaker.

45. [As to filling up Vacancy in Office of Speaker.] In case of a
Vacancy happening in the Office of Speaker by Death, Resignation, or
otherwise, the House of Commons shall with all practicable Speed proceed
to elect another of its Members to be Speaker.

46. [Speaker to preside.] The Speaker shall preside at all Meetings of
the House of Commons.

47. [Provision in case of Absence of Speaker.] Until the Parliament of
Canada otherwise provides, in case of the Absence for any Reason of
the Speaker from the Chair of the House of Commons for a Period of
Forty-eight consecutive Hours, the House may elect another of its
Members to act as Speaker, and the Member so elected shall during the
Continuance of such Absence of the Speaker have and execute all the
Powers, Privileges, and Duties of Speaker.

48. [Quorum of House of Commons.] The Presence of at least Twenty
Members of the House of Commons shall be necessary to constitute a
Meeting of the House for the Exercise of its Powers; and for that
Purpose the Speaker shall be reckoned as a Member.

49. [Voting in House of Commons.] Questions arising in the House of
Commons shall be decided by a Majority of Voices other than that of the
Speaker, and when the Voices are equal, but not otherwise, the Speaker
shall have a Vote.

50. [Duration of House of Commons.] Every House of Commons shall
continue for Five Years from the Day of the Return of the Writs for
choosing the House (subject to be sooner dissolved by the Governor
General), and no longer.

51. [Decennial Re-adjustment of Representation.] On the Completion of
the Census in the Year One thousand eight hundred and seventy-one, and
of each subsequent decennial Census, the Representation of the Four
Provinces shall be readjusted by such Authority, in such Manner, and
from such Time, as the Parliament of Canada from Time to Time provides,
subject and according to the following Rules:

(1.) Quebec shall have the fixed Number of Sixty-five Members:
(2.) There shall be assigned to each of the other Provinces such a
     Number of Members as will bear the same Proportion to the Number
     of its Population (ascertained at such Census) as the Number
     Sixty-five bears to the Number of the Population of Quebec
     (so ascertained):
(3.) In the Computation of the Number of Members for a Province a
     fractional Part not exceeding One Half of the whole Number
     requisite for entitling the Province to a Member shall be
     disregarded; but a fractional Part exceeding One Half of that
     Number shall be equivalent to the whole Number:
(4.) On any such Re-adjustment the Number of Members for a Province
     shall not be reduced unless the Proportion which the Number of the
     Population of the Province bore to the Number of the aggregate
     Population of Canada at the then last preceding Re-adjustment of
     the Number of Members for the Province is ascertained at the then
     latest Census to be diminished by One Twentieth Part or upwards:
(5.) Such Re-adjustment shall not take effect until the Termination
     of the then existing Parliament.

52. [Increase of Number of House of Commons.] The Number of Members
of the House of Commons may be from Time to Time increased by the
Parliament of Canada, provided the proportionate Representation of
the Provinces prescribed by this Act is not thereby disturbed.


Money Votes; Royal Assent.


53. [Appropriation and tax Bills.] Bills for appropriating any Part of
the Public Revenue, or for imposing any Tax or Impost, shall originate
in the House of Commons.

54. [Recommendation of Money Votes.] It shall not be lawful for the
House of Commons to adopt or pass any Vote, Resolution, Address, or Bill
for the Appropriation of any Part of the Public Revenue, or of any Tax
or Impost, to any Purpose that has not been first recommended to that
House by Message of the Governor General in the Session in which such
Vote, Resolution, Address, or Bill is proposed.

55. [Royal Assent to Bills, &c.] Where a Bill passed by the Houses of
the Parliament is presented to the Governor General for the Queen's
Assent, he shall declare, according to his Discretion, but subject to
the Provisions of this Act and to Her Majesty's Instructions, either
that he assents thereto in the Queen's Name, or that he withholds the
Queen's Assent, or that he reserves the Bill for the Signification of
the Queen's Pleasure.

56. [Disallowance by Order in Council of Act assented to by Governor
General.] Where the Governor General assents to a Bill in the Queen's
Name, he shall by the first convenient Opportunity send an authentic
Copy of the Act to One of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
and if the Queen in Council within Two Years after Receipt thereof by
the Secretary of State thinks fit to disallow the Act, such Disallowance
(with a Certificate of the Secretary of State of the Day on which the
Act was received by him) being signified by the Governor General,
by Speech or Message to each of the Houses of the Parliament or by
Proclamation, shall annul the Act from and after the Day of such
Signification.

57. [Signification of Queen's Pleasure on Bill reserved.] A Bill
reserved for the Signification of the Queen's Pleasure shall not have
any Force unless and until within Two Years from the Day on which it was
presented to the Governor General for the Queen's Assent, the Governor
General signifies, by Speech or Message to each of the Houses of the
Parliament or by Proclamation, that it has received the Assent of the
Queen in Council.

An Entry of every such Speech, Message, or Proclamation shall be made in
the Journal of each House, and a Duplicate thereof duly attested shall
be delivered to the proper Officer to be kept among the Records of
Canada.



    V.--PROVINCIAL CONSTITUTIONS.


Executive Power.


58. [Appointment of Lieutenant Governors of Provinces.] For each
Province there shall be an Officer, styled the Lieutenant Governor,
appointed by the Governor General in Council by Instrument under the
Great Seal of Canada.

59. [Tenure of Office of Lieutenant Governor.] A Lieutenant Governor
shall hold Office during the Pleasure of the Governor General; but
any Lieutenant Governor appointed after the Commencement of the First
Session of the Parliament of Canada shall not be removeable within Five
Years from his Appointment, except for Cause assigned, which shall be
communicated to him in Writing within One Month after the Order for his
Removal is made, and shall be communicated by Message to the Senate and
to the House of Commons within One Week thereafter if the Parliament is
then sitting, and if not then within One Week after the Commencement of
the next Session of the Parliament.

60. [Salaries of Lieutenant Governors.] The Salaries of the Lieutenant
Governors shall be fixed and provided by the Parliament of Canada.

61. [Oaths, &c. of Lieutenant Governor.] Every Lieutenant Governor
shall, before assuming the Duties of his Office, make and subscribe
before the Governor General or some Person authorized by him Oaths of
Allegiance and Office similar to those taken by the Governor General.

62. [Application of provisions referring to Lieutenant Governor.] The
Provisions of this Act referring to the Lieutenant Governor extend and
apply to the Lieutenant Governor for the Time being of each Province or
other the Chief Executive Officer or Administrator for the Time being
carrying on the Government of the Province, by whatever Title he is
designated.

63. [Appointment of Executive Officers for Ontario and Quebec.] The
Executive Council of Ontario and of Quebec shall be composed of such
Persons as the Lieutenant Governor from Time to Time thinks fit, and
in the first instance of the following Officers, namely,--the Attorney
General, the Secretary and Registrar of the Province, the Treasurer of
the Province, the Commissioner of Crown Lands, and the Commissioner
of Agriculture and Public Works, with in Quebec, the Speaker of the
Legislative Council and the Solicitor General.

64. [Executive Government of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.] The
Constitution of the Executive Authority in each of the Provinces of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act,
continue as it exists at the Union until altered under the Authority of
this Act.

65. [Powers to be exercised by Lieutenant Governor of Ontario or Quebec
with Advice, or alone.] All Powers, Authorities, and Functions which
under any Act of the Parliament of Great Britain, or of the Parliament
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or of the
Legislature of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, or Canada, were or are before
or at the Union vested in or exerciseable by the respective Governors
or Lieutenant Governors of those Provinces, with the Advice or with the
Advice and Consent of the respective Executive Councils thereof, or in
conjunction with those Councils, or with any Number of Members thereof,
or by those Governors or Lieutenant Governors individually, shall,
as far as the same are capable of being exercised after the Union in
relation to the Government of Ontario and Quebec respectively, be vested
in and shall or may be exercised by the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario
and Quebec respectively, with the Advice or with the Advice and Consent
of or in conjunction with the respective Executive Councils, or any
Members thereof, or by the Lieutenant Governor individually, as the Case
requires, subject nevertheless (except with respect to such as exist
under Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain, or of the Parliament of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,) to be abolished or
altered by the respective Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec.

66. [Application of provisions referring to Lieutenant Governor in
Council.] The Provisions of this Act referring to the Lieutenant
Governor in Council shall be construed as referring to the Lieutenant
Governor of the Province acting by and with the Advice of the Executive
Council thereof.

67. [Administration in Absence, &c. of Lieutenant Governor.] The
Governor General in Council may from Time to Time appoint an
Administrator to execute the Office and Functions of Lieutenant
Governor during his Absence, Illness, or other Inability.

68. [Seats of Provincial Governments.] Unless and until the Executive
Government of any Province otherwise directs with respect to that
Province, the Seats of Government of the Provinces shall be as follows,
namely,--of Ontario, the City of Toronto; of Quebec, the City of Quebec;
of Nova Scotia, the City of Halifax; and of New Brunswick, the City of
Fredericton.


Legislative Power.


1.--ONTARIO.

69. [Legislature for Ontario.] There shall be a Legislature for Ontario
consisting of the Lieutenant Governor and of One House, styled the
Legislative Assembly of Ontario.

70. [Electoral districts.] The Legislative Assembly of Ontario shall
be composed of Eighty-two Members, to be elected to represent the
Eighty-two Electoral Districts set forth in the First Schedule to
this Act.

2.--QUEBEC.

71. [Legislature for Quebec.] There shall be a Legislature for Quebec
consisting of the Lieutenant Governor and of Two Houses, styled the
Legislative Council of Quebec and the Legislative Assembly of Quebec.

72. [Constitution of Legislative Council.] The Legislative Council of
Quebec shall be composed of Twenty-four Members, to be appointed by the
Lieutenant Governor in the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great
Seal of Quebec, one being appointed to represent each of the Twenty-four
Electoral Divisions of Lower Canada in this Act referred to, and each
holding Office for the Term of his Life, unless the Legislature of
Quebec otherwise provides under the Provisions of this Act.

73. [Qualification of Legislative Councillors.] The Qualifications of
the Legislative Councillors of Quebec shall be the same as those of the
Senators for Quebec.

74. [Resignation, Disqualification, &c.] The Place of a Legislative
Councillor of Quebec shall become vacant in the Cases, mutatis mutandis,
in which the Place of Senator becomes vacant.

75. [Vacancies.] When a Vacancy happens in the Legislative Council of
Quebec by Resignation, Death, or otherwise, the Lieutenant Governor, in
the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Quebec, shall
appoint a fit and qualified Person to fill the Vacancy.

76. [Questions as to Vacancies, &c.] If any Question arises respecting
the Qualification of a Legislative Councillor of Quebec, or a Vacancy
in the Legislative Council of Quebec, the same shall be heard and
determined by the Legislative Council.

77. [Speaker of Legislative Council.] The Lieutenant Governor may from
Time to Time, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Quebec, appoint a
Member of the Legislative Council of Quebec to be Speaker thereof, and
may remove him and appoint another in his Stead.

78. [Quorum of Legislative Council.] Until the Legislature of Quebec
otherwise provides, the Presence of at least Ten Members of the
Legislative Council, including the Speaker, shall be necessary to
constitute a Meeting for the Exercise of its Powers.

79. [Voting in Legislative Council.]
Questions arising in the Legislative Council of Quebec shall be decided
by a Majority of Voices, and the Speaker shall in all Cases have a Vote,
and when the Voices are equal the Decision shall be deemed to be in the
negative.

80. [Constitution of Legislative Assembly of Quebec.] The Legislative
Assembly of Quebec shall be composed of Sixty-five Members, to be
elected to represent the Sixty-five Electoral Divisions or Districts
of Lower Canada in this Act referred to, subject to Alteration thereof
by the Legislature of Quebec: Provided that it shall not be lawful to
present to the Lieutenant Governor of Quebec for Assent any Bill for
altering the Limits of any of the Electoral Divisions or Districts
mentioned in the Second Schedule to this Act, unless the Second and
Third Readings of such Bill have been passed in the Legislative Assembly
with the Concurrence of the Majority of the Members representing all
those Electoral Divisions or Districts, and the Assent shall not be
given to such Bill unless an Address has been presented by the
Legislative Assembly to the Lieutenant Governor stating that it has
been so passed.


3.--ONTARIO AND QUEBEC.

81. [First Session of Legislatures.] The Legislatures of Ontario and
Quebec respectively shall be called together not later than Six Months
after the Union.

82. [Summoning of Legislative Assemblies.] The Lieutenant Governor of
Ontario and of Quebec shall from Time to Time, in the Queen's Name,
by Instrument under the Great Seal of the Province, summon and call
together the Legislative Assembly of the Province.

83. [Restriction on election of holders of offices.] Until the
Legislature of Ontario or of Quebec otherwise provides, a Person
accepting or holding in Ontario or in Quebec any Office, Commission, or
Employment, permanent or temporary, at the Nomination of the Lieutenant
Governor, to which an annual Salary, or any Fee, Allowance, Emolument,
or profit of any Kind or Amount whatever from the Province is attached,
shall not be eligible as a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the
respective Province, nor shall he sit or vote as such; but nothing in
this Section shall make ineligible any Person being a Member of the
Executive Council of the respective Province, or holding any of the
following Offices, that is to say, the Offices of Attorney General,
Secretary and Registrar of the Province, Treasurer of the Province,
Commissioner of Crown Lands, and Commissioner of Agriculture and Public
Works, and in Quebec Solicitor General, or shall disqualify him to sit
or vote in the House for which he is elected, provided he is elected
while holding such Office.

84. [Continuance of existing Election Laws.] Until the Legislatures of
Ontario and Quebec respectively otherwise provide, all Laws which at
the Union are in force in those Provinces respectively, relative to
the following Matters, or any of them, namely,--the Qualifications and
Disqualifications of Persons to be elected or to sit or vote as Members
of the Assembly of Canada, the Qualifications or Disqualifications of
Voters, the Oaths to be taken by Voters, the Returning Officers, their
Powers and Duties, the Proceedings at Elections, the Periods during
which such Elections may be continued, and the Trial of controverted
Elections and the Proceedings incident thereto, the vacating of the
Seats of Members and the issuing and execution of new Writs in case of
Seats vacated otherwise than by Dissolution,--shall respectively apply
to Elections of Members to serve in the respective Legislative
Assemblies of Ontario and Quebec.

Provided that until the Legislature of Ontario otherwise provides, at
any Election for a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario for the
District of Algoma, in addition to Persons qualified by the Law of the
Province of Canada to vote, every male British Subject, aged Twenty-one
Years or upwards, being a Householder, shall have a Vote.

85. [Duration of Legislative Assemblies.] Every Legislative Assembly of
Ontario and every Legislative Assembly of Quebec shall continue for Four
Years from the Day of the Return of the Writs for choosing the same
(subject nevertheless to either the Legislative Assembly of Ontario
or the Legislative Assembly of Quebec being sooner dissolved by the
Lieutenant Governor of the Province), and no longer.

86. [Yearly Session of Legislature.] There shall be a session of the
Legislature of Ontario and of that of Quebec once at least in every
Year, so that Twelve Months shall not intervene between the last Sitting
of the Legislature in each Province in one Session and its first Sitting
in the next Session.

87. [Speaker, Quorum, &c.] The following Provisions of this Act
respecting the House of Commons of Canada shall extend and apply to
the Legislative Assemblies of Ontario and Quebec, that is to say,--the
Provisions relating to the Election of a Speaker originally and on
Vacancies, the Duties of the Speaker, the Absence of the Speaker, the
Quorum, and the Mode of voting, as if those Provisions were here
re-enacted and made applicable in Terms to each such Legislative
Assembly.

4.--NOVA SCOTIA AND NEW BRUNSWICK.

88. [Constitutions of Legislatures of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.]
The Constitution of the Legislature of each of the Provinces of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act,
continue as it exists at the Union until altered under the Authority
of this Act; and the House of Assembly of New Brunswick existing at
the passing of this Act shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for
the Period for which it was elected.

5.--ONTARIO, QUEBEC AND NOVA SCOTIA.

89. [First Elections.] Each of the Lieutenant Governors of Ontario,
Quebec and Nova Scotia shall cause Writs to be issued for the First
Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly thereof in such Form and
by such Person as he thinks fit, and at such Time and addressed to such
Returning Officer as the Governor General directs, and so that the
First Election of Member of Assembly for any Electoral District or any
Subdivision thereof shall be held at the same Time and at the same
Places as the Election for a Member to serve in the House of Commons of
Canada for that Electoral District.

6.--THE FOUR PROVINCES.

90. [Application to Legislatures of Provisions respecting Money Votes,
&c.] The following Provisions of this Act respecting the Parliament
of Canada, namely,--the Provisions relating to Appropriation and Tax
Bills, the Recommendation of Money Votes, the Assent to Bills, the
Disallowance of Acts, and the Signification of Pleasure on Bills
reserved,--shall extend and apply to the Legislatures of the several
Provinces as if those Provisions were here re-enacted and made
applicable in Terms to the respective Provinces and the Legislatures
thereof, with the Substitution of the Lieutenant Governor of the
Province for the Governor General, of the Governor General for the
Queen and for a Secretary of State, of One Year for Two Years, and of
the Province for Canada.



    VI.--DISTRIBUTION OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS.


Powers of the Parliament.


91. [Legislative Authority of Parliament of Canada.] It shall be lawful
for the Queen, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate and
House of Commons, to make Laws for the Peace, Order, and good Government
of Canada, in relation to all Matters not coming within the Classes of
Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures of the
Provinces; and for greater Certainty, but not so as to restrict the
Generality of the foregoing Terms of this Section, it is hereby declared
that (notwithstanding anything in this Act) the exclusive Legislative
Authority of the Parliament of Canada extends to all Matters coming
within the Classes of Subjects next hereinafter enumerated; that is
to say,--

   1. The Public Debt and Property.
   2. The Regulation of Trade and Commerce.
   3. The raising of Money by any Mode or System of Taxation.
   4. The borrowing of Money on the Public Credit.
   5. Postal Service.
   6. The Census and Statistics.
   7. Militia, Military and Naval Service, and Defence.
   8. The fixing of and providing for the Salaries and Allowances of
      Civil and other Officers of the Government of Canada.
   9. Beacons, Buoys, Lighthouses, and Sable Island.
  10. Navigation and Shipping.
  11. Quarantine and the Establishment and Maintenance of Marine
      Hospitals.
  12. Sea Coast and Inland Fisheries.
  13. Ferries between a Province and any British or Foreign Country or
      between Two Provinces.
  14. Currency and Coinage.
  15. Banking, Incorporation of Banks, and the Issue of Paper Money.
  16. Savings Banks.
  17. Weights and Measures.
  18. Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes.
  19. Interest.
  20. Legal Tender.
  21. Bankruptcy and Insolvency.
  22. Patents of Invention and Discovery.
  23. Copyrights.
  24. Indians, and Lands reserved for the Indians.
  25. Naturalization and Aliens.
  26. Marriage and Divorce.
  27. The Criminal Law, except the Constitution of Courts of Criminal
      Jurisdiction, but including the Procedure in Criminal Matters.
  28. The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Penitentiaries.
  29. Such Classes of Subjects as are expressly excepted in the
      Enumeration of the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned
      exclusively to the Legislatures of the Provinces.

And any Matter coming within any of the Classes of Subjects enumerated
in this Section shall not be deemed to come within the Class of Matters
of a local or private Nature comprised in the Enumeration of the Classes
of Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures of the
Provinces.


Exclusive Powers of Provincial Legislatures.


92. [Subjects of exclusive Provincial Legislation.] In each Province
the Legislature may exclusively make Laws in relation to Matters coming
within the Classes of Subjects next hereinafter enumerated, that is to
say,--

   1. The Amendment from Time to Time, notwithstanding anything in this
      Act, of the Constitution of the Province, except as regards the
      Office of Lieutenant Governor.
   2. Direct Taxation within the Province in order to the raising of
      a Revenue for Provincial Purposes.
   3. The borrowing of Money on the sole Credit of the Province.
   4. The Establishment and Tenure of Provincial Offices and the
      Appointment and Payment of Provincial Officers.
   5. The Management and Sale of the Public Lands belonging to the
      Province and of the Timber and Wood thereon.
   6. The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Public and
      Reformatory Prisons in and for the Province.
   7. The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Hospitals,
      Asylums, Charities, and Eleemosynary Institutions in and for
      the Province, other than Marine Hospitals.
   8. Municipal Institutions in the Province.
   9. Shop, Saloon, Tavern, Auctioneer, and other Licences in order to
      the raising of a Revenue for Provincial, Local, or Municipal
      Purposes.
  10. Local Works and Undertakings other than such as are of the
      following Classes,--
        a. Lines of Steam or other Ships, Railways, Canals, Telegraphs,
           and other Works and Undertakings connecting the Province with
           any other or others of the Provinces, or extending beyond the
           Limits of the Province:
        b. Lines of Steam Ships between the Province and any British
           or Foreign Country:
        c. Such Works as, although wholly situate within the Province,
           are before or after their Execution declared by the
           Parliament of Canada to be for the general Advantage of
           Canada or for the Advantage of Two or more of the Provinces.
  11. The Incorporation of Companies with Provincial Objects.
  12. The Solemnization of Marriage in the Province.
  13. Property and Civil Rights in the Province.
  14. The Administration of Justice in the Province, including the
      Constitution, Maintenance, and Organization of Provincial Courts,
      both of Civil and of Criminal Jurisdiction, and including
      Procedure in Civil Matters in those Courts.
  15. The Imposition of Punishment by Fine, Penalty, or Imprisonment for
      enforcing any Law of the Province made in relation to any Matter
      coming within any of the Classes of Subjects enumerated in this
      Section.
  16. Generally all Matters of a merely local or private Nature in the
      Province.


Education.


93. [Legislation respecting Education.] In and for each Province the
Legislature may exclusively make Laws in relation to Education, subject
and according to the following Provisions:--

(1.) Nothing in any such Law shall prejudicially affect any Right or
     Privilege with respect to Denominational Schools which any Class
     of Persons have by Law in the Province at the Union:
(2.) All the Powers, Privileges, and Duties at the Union by Law
     conferred and imposed in Upper Canada on the Separate Schools and
     School Trustees of the Queen's Roman Catholic Subjects shall be
     and the same are hereby extended to the Dissentient Schools of the
     Queen's Protestant and Roman Catholic Subjects in Quebec:
(3.) Where in any Province a System of Separate or Dissentient
     Schools exists by Law at the Union or is thereafter established
     by the Legislature of the Province, an Appeal shall lie to the
     Governor General in Council from any Act or Decision of any
     Provincial Authority affecting any Right or Privilege of the
     Protestant or Roman Catholic Minority of the Queen's Subjects in
     relation to Education:
(4.) In case any such Provincial Law as from Time to Time seems to
     the Governor General in Council requisite for the due Execution
     of the Provisions of this Section is not made, or in case any
     Decision of the Governor General in Council on any Appeal under
     this Section is not duly executed by the proper Provincial
     Authority in that Behalf, then and in every such Case, and as far
     only as the Circumstances of each Case require, the Parliament
     of Canada may make remedial Laws for the due Execution of the
     Provisions of this Section and of any Decision of the Governor
     General in Council under this Section.


Uniformity of Laws in Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick.


94. [Legislation for Uniformity of Laws in three Provinces.]
Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Parliament of Canada may make
Provision for the Uniformity of all or any of the Laws relative to
Property and Civil Rights in Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick,
and of the Procedure of all or any of the Courts in those Three
Provinces, and from and after the passing of any Act in that Behalf
the Power of the Parliament of Canada to make Laws in relation to any
Matter comprised in any such Act shall, notwithstanding anything in this
Act, be unrestricted; but any Act of the Parliament of Canada making
Provision for such Uniformity shall not have effect in any Province
unless and until it is adopted and enacted as Law by the Legislature
thereof.


Agriculture and Immigration.


95. [Concurrent Powers of Legislation respecting Agriculture, &c.] In
each Province the Legislature may make Laws in relation to Agriculture
in the Province, and to Immigration into the Province; and it is hereby
declared that the Parliament of Canada may from Time to Time make
Laws in relation to Agriculture in all or any of the Provinces, and
to Immigration into all or any of the Provinces; and any Law of the
Legislature of a Province relative to Agriculture or to Immigration
shall have effect in and for the Province as long and as far only as
it is not repugnant to any Act of the Parliament of Canada.



    VII.--JUDICATURE.


96. [Appointment of Judges.] The Governor General shall appoint the
Judges of the Superior, District, and County Courts in each Province,
except those of the Courts of Probate in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.

97. [Selection of Judges in Ontario, &c.] Until the Laws relative to
Property and Civil Rights in Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick,
and the Procedure of the Courts in those Provinces, are made uniform,
the Judges of the Courts of those Provinces appointed by the Governor
General shall be selected from the respective Bars of those Provinces.

98. [Selection of Judges in Quebec.] The Judges of the Courts of Quebec
shall be selected from the Bar of that Province.

99. [Tenure of Office of Judges of Superior Courts.] The Judges of the
Superior Courts shall hold office during good Behaviour, but shall be
removable by the Governor General on Address of the Senate and House of
Commons.

100. [Salaries, &c., of Judges.] The Salaries, Allowances, and Pensions
of the Judges of the Superior, District, and County Courts (except the
Courts of Probate in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), and of the
Admiralty Courts in Cases where the Judges thereof are for the Time
being paid by Salary, shall be fixed and provided by the Parliament of
Canada.

101. [General Court of Appeal, &c.] The Parliament of Canada may,
notwithstanding anything in this Act, from Time to Time, provide for the
Constitution, Maintenance, and Organization of a General Court of Appeal
for Canada, and for the Establishment of any additional Courts for the
better Administration of the Laws of Canada.



    VIII.--REVENUES; DEBTS; ASSETS; TAXATION.


102. [Creation of Consolidated Revenue Fund.] All Duties and Revenues
over which the respective Legislatures of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New
Brunswick before and at the Union had and have Power of Appropriation,
except such Portions thereof as are by this Act reserved to the
respective Legislatures of the Provinces, or are raised by them in
accordance with the special Powers conferred on them by this Act, shall
form One Consolidated Revenue Fund, to be appropriated for the Public
Service of Canada in the Manner and subject to the Charges in this Act
provided.

103. [Expenses of Collection, &c.] The Consolidated Revenue Fund of
Canada shall be permanently charged with the Costs, Charges, and
Expenses incident to the Collection, Management, and Receipt thereof,
and the same shall form the First Charge thereon, subject to be reviewed
and audited in such Manner as shall be ordered by the Governor General
in Council until the Parliament otherwise provides.

104. [Interest of Provincial Public Debts.] The annual Interest of the
Public Debts of the several Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New
Brunswick at the Union shall form the Second Charge on the Consolidated
Revenue Fund of Canada.

105. [Salary of Governor General.] Unless altered by the Parliament of
Canada, the salary of the Governor General shall be Ten thousand Pounds
Sterling Money of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada, and the same
shall form the Third Charge thereon.

106. [Appropriation from time to time.] Subject to the several Payments
by this Act charged on the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada, the same
shall be appropriated by the Parliament of Canada for the Public
Service.

107. [Transfer of Stocks, &c.] All Stocks, Cash, Banker's Balances,
and Securities for Money belonging to each Province at the time of the
Union, except as in this Act mentioned, shall be the Property of Canada,
and shall be taken in Reduction of the Amount of the respective Debts
of the Provinces at the Union.

108. [Transfer of Property in Schedule.] The Public Works and Property
of each Province, enumerated in the Third Schedule to this Act, shall
be the Property of Canada.

109. [Property in Lands, Mines, &c.] All Lands, Mines, Minerals, and
Royalties belonging to the several Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia,
and New Brunswick at the Union, and all Sums then due or payable for
such Lands, Mines, Minerals, or Royalties, shall belong to the several
Provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick in which
the same are situate or arise, subject to any Trusts existing in respect
thereof, and to any Interest other than that of the Province in the
same.

110. [Assets connected with Provincial Debts.] All Assets connected with
such Portions of the Public Debt of each Province as are assumed by that
Province shall belong to that Province.

111. [Canada to be liable for Provincial Debts.] Canada shall be liable
for the Debts and Liabilities of each Province existing at the Union.

112. [Debts of Ontario and Quebec.] Ontario and Quebec conjointly shall
be liable to Canada for the Amount (if any) by which the Debt of the
Province of Canada exceeds at the Union Sixty-two million five hundred
thousand Dollars, and shall be charged with Interest at the Rate of Five
per Centum per Annum thereon.

113. [Assets of Ontario and Quebec.] The Assets enumerated in the Fourth
Schedule to this Act belonging at the Union to the Province of Canada
shall be the Property of Ontario and Quebec conjointly.

114. [Debt of Nova Scotia.] Nova Scotia shall be liable to Canada for
the Amount (if any) by which its Public Debt exceeds at the Union Eight
million Dollars, and shall be charged with Interest at the Rate of Five
per Centum per Annum thereon.

115. [Debt of New Brunswick.] New Brunswick shall be liable to Canada
for the Amount (if any) by which its Public Debt exceeds at the Union
Seven million Dollars, and shall be charged with Interest at the Rate
of Five per Centum per Annum thereon.

116. [Payment of Interest to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.] In case
the Public Debts of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick do not at the Union
amount to Eight million and Seven million Dollars respectively, they
shall respectively receive by half-yearly Payments in advance from
the Government of Canada Interest at Five per Centum per Annum on the
Difference between the actual Amounts of their respective Debts and
such stipulated Amounts.

117. [Provincial Public Property.] The several Provinces shall retain
all their respective Public Property not otherwise disposed of in this
Act, subject to the Right of Canada to assume any Lands or Public
Property required for Fortifications or for the Defence of the Country.

118. [Grants to Provinces.] The following Sums shall be paid yearly by
Canada to the several Provinces for the Support of their Governments
and Legislatures:

                                 Dollars.
  Ontario . . . . . . . . . . Eighty thousand.
  Quebec . . . . . . . . . . .Seventy thousand.
  Nova Scotia . . . . . . . . Sixty thousand.
  New Brunswick . . . . . . . Fifty thousand.
                             ------------------
                 Two hundred and sixty thousand;

and an annual Grant in aid of each Province shall be made, equal to
Eighty Cents per Head of the Population as ascertained by the Census
of One thousand eight hundred and sixty-one, and in the Case of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick, by each subsequent Decennial Census until
the Population of each of those Two Provinces amounts to Four hundred
thousand Souls, at which Rate such Grant shall thereafter remain. Such
Grants shall be in full Settlement of all future Demands on Canada,
and shall be paid half-yearly in advance to each Province; but the
Government of Canada shall deduct from such Grants, as against any
Province, all Sums chargeable as Interest on the Public Debt of that
Province in excess of the several Amounts stipulated in this Act.

119. [Further Grant to New Brunswick.] New Brunswick shall receive by
half-yearly Payments in advance from Canada for the Period of Ten Years
from the Union an additional Allowance of Sixty-three thousand Dollars
per Annum; but as long as the Public Debt of that Province remains under
Seven million Dollars, a Deduction equal to the Interest at Five per
Centum per Annum on such Deficiency shall be made from that Allowance
of Sixty-three thousand Dollars.

120. [Form of Payments.] All Payments to be made under this Act, or
in discharge of Liabilities created under any Act of the Provinces of
Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick respectively, and assumed by
Canada, shall, until the Parliament of Canada otherwise directs, be
made in such Form and Manner as may from Time to Time be ordered by
the Governor General in Council.

121. [Canadian Manufactures, &c.] All Articles of the Growth, Produce,
or Manufacture of any one of the Provinces shall, from and after the
Union, be admitted free into each of the other Provinces.

122. [Continuance of customs and excise Laws.] The Customs and Excise
Laws of each Province shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act,
continue in force until altered by the Parliament of Canada.

123. [Exportation and Importation as between Two Provinces.] Where
Customs Duties are, at the Union, leviable on any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises in any Two Provinces, those Goods, Wares, and Merchandises
may, from and after the Union, be imported from one of those Provinces
into the other of them on Proof of Payment of the Customs Duty leviable
thereon in the Province of Exportation, and on Payment of such further
Amount (if any) of Customs Duty as is leviable thereon in the Province
of Importation.

124. [Lumber Dues in New Brunswick.] Nothing in this Act shall affect
the Right of New Brunswick to levy the Lumber Dues provided in Chapter
Fifteen of Title Three of the Revised Statutes of New Brunswick, or in
any Act amending that Act before or after the Union, and not increasing
the Amount of such Dues; but the Lumber of any of the Provinces other
than New Brunswick shall not be subject to such Dues.

125. [Exemption of Public Lands, &c.] No Lands or Property belonging to
Canada or any Province shall be liable to Taxation.

126. [Provincial Consolidated Revenue Fund.] Such Portions of the Duties
and Revenues over which the respective Legislatures of Canada, Nova
Scotia, and New Brunswick had before the Union Power of Appropriation as
are by this Act reserved to the respective Governments or Legislatures
of the Provinces, and all Duties and Revenues raised by them in
accordance with the special Powers conferred upon them by this Act,
shall in each Province form One Consolidated Revenue Fund to be
appropriated for the Public Service of the Province.



    IX.--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.


General.


127. [As to Legislative Councillors of Provinces becoming senators.] If
any Person being at the passing of this Act a Member of the Legislative
Council of Canada, Nova Scotia, or New Brunswick, to whom a Place in the
Senate is offered, does not within Thirty Days thereafter, by Writing
under his Hand addressed to the Governor General of the Province of
Canada or to the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia or New Brunswick (as
the Case may be), accept the same, he shall be deemed to have declined
the same; and any Person who, being at the passing of this Act a Member
of the Legislative Council of Nova Scotia or New Brunswick, accepts a
Place in the Senate shall thereby vacate his Seat in such Legislative
Council.

128. [Oath of Allegiance, &c.] Every Member of the Senate or House
of Commons of Canada shall before taking his Seat therein take and
subscribe before the Governor General or some Person authorized by him,
and every Member of a Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly of
any Province shall before taking his Seat therein take and subscribe
before the Lieutenant Governor of the Province or some Person authorized
by him, the Oath of Allegiance contained in the Fifth Schedule to this
Act; and every Member of the Senate of Canada and every Member of
the Legislative Council of Quebec shall also, before taking his Seat
therein, take and subscribe before the Governor General, or some Person
authorized by him, the Declaration of Qualification contained in the
same Schedule.

129. [Continuance of existing Laws, Courts, Officers, &c.] Except
as otherwise provided by this Act, all Laws in force in Canada,
Nova Scotia, or New Brunswick at the Union, and all Courts of Civil
and Criminal Jurisdiction, and all legal Commissions, Powers,
and Authorities, and all Officers, Judicial, Administrative, and
Ministerial, existing therein at the Union, shall continue in Ontario,
Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick respectively, as if the Union had
not been made; subject nevertheless (except with respect to such as are
enacted by or exist under Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain or of
the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,) to
be repealed, abolished, or altered by the Parliament of Canada, or by
the Legislature of the respective Province, according to the Authority
of the Parliament or of that Legislature under this Act.

130. [Transfer of Officers to Canada.] Until the Parliament of Canada
otherwise provides, all Officers of the several Provinces having Duties
to discharge in relation to Matters other than those coming within
the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the
Legislatures of the Provinces shall be Officers of Canada, and shall
continue to discharge the Duties of their respective Offices under the
same Liabilities, Responsibilities, and Penalties as if the Union had
not been made.

131. [Appointment of new Officers.] Until the Parliament of Canada
otherwise provides, the Governor General in Council may from Time to
Time appoint such Officers as the Governor General in Council deems
necessary or proper for the effectual Execution of this Act.

132. [Treaty Obligations.] The Parliament and Government of Canada
shall have all Powers necessary or proper for performing the Obligations
of Canada or of any Province thereof, as Part of the British Empire,
towards Foreign Countries arising under Treaties between the Empire and
such Foreign Countries.

133. [Use of English and French Languages.] Either the English or the
French Language may be used by any Person in the Debates of the Houses
of the Parliament of Canada and of the Houses of the Legislature of
Quebec; and both those Languages shall be used in the respective Records
and Journals of those Houses; and either of those Languages may be used
by any Person or in any Pleading or Process in or issuing from any Court
of Canada established under this Act, and in or from all or any of the
Courts of Quebec.

The Acts of the Parliament of Canada and of the Legislature of Quebec
shall be printed and published in both those Languages.


Ontario and Quebec.


134. [Appointment of executive officers for Ontario and Quebec.] Until
the Legislature of Ontario or of Quebec otherwise provides, the
Lieutenant Governors of Ontario and Quebec may each appoint under the
Great Seal of the Province the following Officers, to hold Office
during Pleasure, that is to say,--the Attorney General, the Secretary
and Registrar of the Province, the Treasurer of the Province, the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, and the Commissioner of Agriculture and
Public Works, and in the Case of Quebec the Solicitor General, and
may, by Order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, from Time to Time
prescribe the Duties of those Officers and of the several Departments
over which they shall preside or to which they shall belong, and of the
Officers and Clerks thereof; and may also appoint other and additional
Officers to hold Office during Pleasure, and may from Time to Time
prescribe the Duties of those Officers, and of the several Departments
over which they shall preside or to which they shall belong, and of the
Officers and Clerks thereof.

135. [Powers, duties, &c., of Executive officers.] Until the Legislature
of Ontario or Quebec otherwise provides, all Rights, Powers, Duties,
Functions, Responsibilities, or Authorities at the passing of this
Act vested in or imposed on the Attorney General, Solicitor General,
Secretary and Registrar of the Province of Canada, Minister of Finance,
Commissioner of Crown Lands, Commissioner of Public Works, and Minister
of Agriculture and Receiver General, by any Law, Statute or Ordinance
of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, or Canada, and not repugnant to this Act,
shall be vested in or imposed on any Officer to be appointed by the
Lieutenant Governor for the Discharge of the same or any of them; and
the Commissioner of Agriculture and Public Works shall perform the
Duties and Functions of the Office of Minister of Agriculture at the
passing of this Act imposed by the Law of the Province of Canada, as
well as those of the Commissioner of Public Works.

136. [Great Seals.] Until altered by the Lieutenant Governor in Council,
the Great Seals of Ontario and Quebec respectively shall be the same, or
of the same Design, as those used in the Provinces of Upper Canada and
Lower Canada respectively before their Union as the Province of Canada.

137. [Construction of temporary Acts.] The Words "and from thence to the
End of the then next ensuing Session of the Legislature," or Words to
the same Effect, used in any temporary Act of the Province of Canada not
expired before the Union, shall be construed to extend and apply to the
next Session of the Parliament of Canada if the Subject Matter of the
Act is within the Powers of the same, as defined by this Act, or to the
next Sessions of the Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec respectively,
if the Subject Matter of the Act is within the Powers of the same as
defined by this Act.

138. [As to Errors in Names.] From and after the Union the Use of the
Words "Upper Canada" instead of "Ontario," or "Lower Canada" instead of
"Quebec," in any Deed, Writ, Process, Pleading, Document, Matter, or
Thing, shall not invalidate the same.

139. [As to Issue of Proclamations before Union, to commence after
Union.] Any Proclamation under the Great Seal of the Province of Canada
issued before the Union to take effect at a Time which is subsequent to
the Union, whether relating to that Province, or to Upper Canada, or
to Lower Canada, and the several Matters and Things therein proclaimed
shall be and continue of like Force and Effect as if the Union had not
been made.

140. [As to Issue of Proclamations after Union.] Any Proclamation which
is authorized by any Act of the Legislature of the Province of Canada
to be issued under the Great Seal of the Province of Canada, whether
relating to that Province, or to Upper Canada, or to Lower Canada, and
which is not issued before the Union, may be issued by the Lieutenant
Governor of Ontario or of Quebec, as its Subject Matter requires,
under the Great Seal thereof; and from and after the Issue of such
Proclamation the same and the several Matters and Things therein
proclaimed shall be and continue of the like Force and Effect in Ontario
or Quebec as if the Union had not been made.

141. [Penitentiary.] The Penitentiary of the Province of Canada shall,
until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, be and continue the
Penitentiary of Ontario and of Quebec.

142. [Arbitration respecting Debts, &c.] The Division and Adjustment
of the Debts, Credits, Liabilities, Properties, and Assets of Upper
Canada and Lower Canada shall be referred to the Arbitrament of Three
Arbitrators, One chosen by the Government of Ontario, One by the
Government of Quebec, and One by the Government of Canada; and the
Selection of the Arbitrators shall not be made until the Parliament of
Canada and the Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec have met; and the
Arbitrator chosen by the Government of Canada shall not be a Resident
either in Ontario or in Quebec.

143. [Division of Records.] The Governor General in Council may from
Time to Time order that such and so many of the Records, Books,
and Documents of the Province of Canada as he thinks fit shall be
appropriated and delivered either to Ontario or to Quebec, and the
same shall thenceforth be the Property of that Province; and any Copy
thereof or Extract therefrom, duly certified by the Officer having
charge of the Original thereof, shall be admitted as Evidence.

144. [Constitution of Townships in Quebec.] The Lieutenant Governor of
Quebec may from Time to Time, by Proclamation under the Great Seal
of the Province, to take effect from a Day to be appointed therein,
constitute Townships in those Parts of the Province of Quebec in which
Townships are not then already constituted, and fix the Metes and
Bounds thereof.



    X.--INTERCOLONIAL RAILWAY.


145. [Duty of Government and Parliament of Canada to make Railway herein
described.] Inasmuch as the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New
Brunswick have joined in a Declaration that the Construction of the
Intercolonial Railway is essential to the Consolidation of the Union of
British North America, and to the Assent thereto of Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick, and have consequently agreed that Provision should be made
for its immediate Construction by the Government of Canada: Therefore,
in order to give effect to that Agreement, it shall be the Duty of the
Government and Parliament of Canada to provide for the Commencement
within Six Months after the Union, of a Railway connecting the River
St. Lawrence with the City of Halifax in Nova Scotia, and for the
Construction thereof without Intermission, and the Completion thereof
with all practicable Speed.



    XI.--ADMISSION OF OTHER COLONIES.


146. [Power to admit Newfoundland, &c., into the Union.] It shall be
lawful for the Queen, by and with the Advice of Her Majesty's Most
Honourable Privy Council, on Addresses from the Houses of the Parliament
of Canada, and from the Houses of the respective Legislatures of the
Colonies or Provinces of Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, and British
Columbia, to admit those Colonies or Provinces, or any of them, into the
Union, and on Address from the Houses of the Parliament of Canada to
admit Rupert's Land and the North-western Territory, or either of them,
into the Union, on such Terms and Conditions in each Case as are in the
Addresses expressed and as the Queen thinks fit to approve, subject to
the Provisions of this Act; and the Provisions of any Order in Council
in that Behalf shall have effect as if they had been enacted by the
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

147. [As to Representation of Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island in
Senate.] In case of the Admission of Newfoundland and Prince Edward
Island, or either of them, each shall be entitled to a Representation
in the Senate of Canada of Four Members, and (notwithstanding anything
in this Act) in case of the Admission of Newfoundland the normal Number
of Senators shall be Seventy-six and their maximum Number shall be
Eighty-two; but Prince Edward Island when admitted shall be deemed to
be comprised in the third of the Three Divisions into which Canada is,
in relation to the Constitution of the Senate, divided by this Act,
and accordingly, after the Admission of Prince Edward Island, whether
Newfoundland is admitted or not, the Representation of Nova Scotia and
New Brunswick in the Senate shall, as Vacancies occur, be reduced from
Twelve to Ten Members respectively, and the Representation of each of
those Provinces shall not be increased at any Time beyond Ten, except
under the Provisions of this Act for the Appointment of Three or Six
additional Senators under the Direction of the Queen.




SCHEDULES.



THE FIRST SCHEDULE.

Electoral Districts of Ontario.


A. Existing Electoral Divisions.

Counties.

1. Prescott.
2. Glengarry.
3. Stormont.
4. Dundas.
5. Russell.
6. Carleton.
7. Prince Edward.
8. Halton.
9. Essex.

Ridings of Counties

10. North Riding of Lanark.
11. South Riding of Lanark.
12. North Riding of Leeds and North Riding of Grenville.
13. South Riding of Leeds.
14. South Riding of Grenville.
15. East Riding of Northumberland.
16. West Riding of Northumberland (excepting therefrom the Township
    of South Monaghan).
17. East Riding of Durham.
18. West Riding of Durham.
19. North Riding of Ontario.
20. South Riding of Ontario.
21. East Riding of York.
22. West Riding of York.
23. North Riding of York.
24. North Riding of Wentworth.
25. South Riding of Wentworth.
26. East Riding of Elgin.
27. West Riding of Elgin.
28. North Riding of Waterloo.
29. South Riding of Waterloo.
30. North Riding of Brant.
31. South Riding of Brant.
32. North Riding of Oxford.
33. South Riding of Oxford.
34. East Riding of Middlesex.

Cities, Parts of Cities, and Towns.

35. West Toronto.
36. East Toronto.
37. Hamilton
38. Ottawa
39. Kingston
40. London
41. Town of Brockville, with the Township of Elizabethtown thereto
    attached.
42. Town of Niagara, with the Township of Niagara thereto attached.
43. Town of Cornwall, with the Township of Cornwall thereto attached.


B. New Electoral Divisions.

44. The Provisional Judicial District of ALGOMA.

The County of BRUCE, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively
the North and South Ridings:--

45. The North Riding of Bruce to consist of the Townships of Bury,
    Lindsay, Eastnor, Albermarle, Amabel, Arran, Bruce, Elderslie,
    and Saugeen, and the Village of Southampton.

46. The South Riding of Bruce to consist of the Townships of
    Kincardine (including the Village of Kincardine), Greenock,
    Brant, Huron, Kinloss, Culross, and Carrick.

The County of HURON, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively
the North and South Ridings:--

47. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Ashfield,
    Wawanosh, Turnberry, Howick, Morris, Grey, Colborne, Hullett,
    including the Village of Clinton, and McKillop.

48. The South Riding to consist of the Town of Goderich and the
    Townships of Goderich, Tuckersmith, Stanley, Hay, Usborne,
    and Stephen.

The County of MIDDLESEX, divided into three Ridings, to be called
respectively the North, West, and East Ridings:--

49. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of McGillivray and
    Biddulph (taken from the County of Huron), and Williams East,
    Williams West, Adelaide, and Lobo.

50. The West Riding to consist of the Townships of Delaware, Carradoc,
    Metcalfe, Mosa and Ekfrid, and the Village of Strathroy.

[The East Riding to consist of the Townships now embraced therein, and
be bounded as it is at present.]

51. The County of LAMBTON to consist of the Townships of Bosanquet,
    Warwick, Plympton, Sarnia, Moore, Enniskillen, and Brooke, and
    the Town of Sarnia.

52. The County of KENT to consist of the Townships of Chatham,
    Dover, East Tilbury, Romney, Raleigh, and Harwich, and the
    Town of Chatham.

53. The County of BOTHWELL to consist of the Townships of Sombra,
    Dawn, and Euphemia (taken from the County of Lambton), and the
    Townships of Zone, Camden with the Gore thereof, Orford, and
    Howard (taken from the County of Kent).

The County of GREY, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively
the South and North Ridings:--

54. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Bentinck, Glenelg,
    Artemesia, Osprey, Normanby, Egremont, Proton, and Melancthon.

55. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Collingwood,
    Euphrasia, Holland, Saint-Vincent, Sydenham, Sullivan, Derby,
    and Keppel, Sarawak and Brooke, and the Town of Owen Sound.

The County of PERTH, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively
the South and North Ridings:--

56. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Wallace, Elma,
    Logan, Ellice, Mornington, and North Easthope, and the Town of
    Stratford.

57. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Blanchard, Downie,
    South Easthope, Fullarton, Hibbert, and the Villages of Mitchell
    and Ste. Marys.

The County of WELLINGTON, divided into Three Ridings, to be called
respectively North, South and Centre Ridings:--

58. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Amaranth, Arthur,
    Luther, Minto, Maryborough, Peel, and the Village of Mount Forest.

59. The Centre Riding to consist of the Townships of Garafraxa, Erin,
    Eramosa, Nichol, and Pilkington, and the Villages of Fergus and
    Elora.

60. The South Riding to consist of the Town of Guelph, and the
    Townships of Guelph and Puslinch.

The County of NORFOLK, divided into Two Ridings, to be called
respectively the South and North Ridings:--

61. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Charlotteville,
    Houghton, Walsingham, and Woodhouse, and with the Gore thereof.

62. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Middleton,
    Townsend, and Windham, and the Town of Simcoe.

63. The County of HALDIMAND to consist of the Townships of Oneida,
    Seneca, Cayuga North, Cayuga South, Raynham, Walpole, and Dunn.

64. The County of MONCK to consist of the Townships of Canborough and
    Moulton, and Sherbrooke, and the Village of Dunnville (taken from
    the County of Haldimand), the Townships of Caistor and
    Gainsborough (taken from the County of Lincoln), and the Townships
    of Pelham and Wainfleet (taken from the County of Welland).

65. The County of LINCOLN to consist of the Townships of Clinton,
    Grantham, Grimsby, and Louth, and the Town of St. Catherines.

66. The County of WELLAND to consist of the Townships of Bertie,
    Crowland, Humberstone, Stamford, Thorold, and Willoughby, and the
    Villages of Chippewa, Clifton, Fort Erie, Thorold, and Welland.

67. The County of PEEL to consist of the Townships of Chinguacousy,
    Toronto, and the Gore of Toronto, and the Villages of Brampton
    and Streetsville.

68. The County of CARDWELL to consist of the Townships of Albion and
    Caledon (taken from the County of Peel), and the Townships of
    Adjala and Mono (taken from the County of Simcoe).

The County of SIMCOE, divided into Two Ridings, to be called
respectively the South and North Ridings:--

69. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of West Gwillimbury,
    Tecumseth, Innisfil, Essa, Tossorontio, Mulmur, and the Village
    of Bradford.

70. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Nottawasaga,
    Sunnidale, Vespra, Flos, Oro, Medonte, Orillia and Matchedash,
    Tiny and Tay, Balaklava and Robinson, and the Towns of Barrie
    and Collingwood.

The County of VICTORIA, divided into Two Ridings, to be called
respectively the South and North Ridings:--

71. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Ops, Mariposa,
    Emily, Verulam, and the Town of Lindsay.

72. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Anson, Bexley,
    Carden, Dalton, Digby, Eldon, Fenelon, Hindon, Laxton,
    Lutterworth, Macaulay and Draper, Sommerville, and Morrison,
    Muskoka, Monck and Watt (taken from the County of Simcoe), and
    any other surveyed Townships lying to the North of the said
    North Riding.

The County of PETERBOROUGH, divided into Two Ridings, to be called
respectively the West and East Ridings:--

73. The West Riding to consist of the Townships of South Monaghan
    (taken from the County of Northumberland), North Monaghan, Smith,
    and Ennismore, and the Town of Peterborough.

74. The East Riding to consist of the Townships of Asphodel, Belmont
    and Methuen, Douro, Dummer, Galway, Harvey, Minden, Stanhope and
    Dysart, Otonabee, and Snowden, and the Village of Ashburnham,
    and any other surveyed Townships lying to the North of the said
    East Riding.

The County of HASTINGS, divided into Three Ridings, to be called
respectively the West, East, and North Ridings:--

75. The West Riding to consist of the Town of Belleville, the
    Township of Sydney, and the Village of Trenton.

76. The East Riding to consist of the Townships of Thurlow,
    Tyendinaga, and Hungerford.

77. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Rawdon,
    Huntingdon, Madoc, Elzevir, Tudor, Marmora, and Lake, and
    the Village of Stirling, and any other surveyed Townships
    lying to the North of the said North Riding.

78. The County of LENNOX to consist of the Townships of Richmond,
    Adolphustown, North Fredericksburgh, South Fredericksburgh,
    Ernest Town, and Amherst Island, and the Village of Napanee.

79. The County of ADDINGTON to consist of the Townships of Camden,
    Portland, Sheffield, Hinchinbrooke, Kaladar, Kennebec, Olden,
    Oso, Anglesea, Barrie, Clarendon, Palmerston, Effingham, Abinger,
    Miller, Canonto, Denbigh, Loughborough, and Bedford.

80. The County of FRONTENAC to consist of the Townships of Kingston,
    Wolfe Island, Pittsburg and Howe Island, and Storrington.

The County of RENFREW, divided into Two Ridings, to be called
respectively the South and North Ridings:--

81. The South Riding to consist of the Townships of McNab, Bagot,
    Blithfield, Brougham, Horton, Admaston, Grattan, Matawatchan,
    Griffith, Lyndoch, Raglan, Radcliffe, Brudenell, Sebastopol,
    and the Villages of Arnprior and Renfrew.

82. The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Ross, Bromley,
    Westmeath, Stafford, Pembroke, Wilberforce, Alice, Petawawa,
    Buchanan, South Algona, North Algona, Fraser, McKay, Wylie,
    Rolph, Head, Maria, Clara, Haggerty, Sherwood, Burns, and
    Richards, and any other surveyed Townships lying North-westerly
    of the said North Riding.


Every Town and incorporated Village existing at the Union, not
especially mentioned in this Schedule, is to be taken as Part of the
County or Riding within which it is locally situate.



THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

Electoral Districts of Quebec specially fixed.


Counties of--

  Pontiac.
  Ottawa.
  Argenteuil.
  Huntingdon.
  Missisquoi.
  Brome.
  Shefford.
  Stanstead.
  Compton.
  Wolfe and Richmond.
  Megantic.
  Town of Sherbrooke.



THE THIRD SCHEDULE.

Provincial Public Works and Property to be the Property of Canada.


1. Canals, with Lands and Water Power connected therewith.
2. Public Harbours.
3. Lighthouses and Piers, and Sable Island.
4. Steamboats, Dredges, and Public Vessels.
5. Rivers and Lake Improvements.
6. Railways and Railway Stocks, Mortgages, and other Debts due by
   Railway Companies.
7. Military Roads.
8. Custom Houses, Post Offices, and all other Public Buildings, except
   such as the Government of Canada appropriate for the Use of the
   Provincial Legislatures and Governments.
9. Property transferred by the Imperial Government, and known as
   Ordnance Property.
10. Armouries, Drill Sheds, Military Clothing, and Munitions of War,
    and Lands set apart for general Public Purposes.



THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.

Assets to be the Property of Ontario and Quebec conjointly.


   Upper Canada Building Fund.
   Lunatic Asylums.
   Normal School.
   Court Houses in |
   Aylmer,         | Lower Canada.
   Montreal,       |
   Kamouraska,     |
   Law Society, Upper Canada.
   Montreal Turnpike Trust.
   University Permanent Fund.
   Royal Institution.
   Consolidated Municipal Loan Fund, Upper Canada.
   Consolidated Municipal Loan Fund, Lower Canada.
   Agricultural Society, Upper Canada.
   Lower Canada Legislative Grant.
   Quebec Fire Loan.
   Temiscouata Advance Account.
   Quebec Turnpike Trust.
   Education--East.
   Building and Jury Fund, Lower Canada.
   Municipalities Fund.
   Lower Canada Superior Education Income Fund.



THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.

Oath of Allegiance.


I, A.B., do swear, That I will be faithful and bear true Allegiance
to Her Majesty Queen Victoria.

Note.--The Name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland for the Time being is to be substituted from Time
to Time, with proper Terms of Reference thereto.


Declaration of Qualification.


I, A.B., do declare and testify, That I am by Law duly qualified to be
appointed a Member of the Senate of Canada [or as the Case may be], and
that I am legally or equitably seised as of Freehold for my own Use and
Benefit of Lands or Tenements held in Free and Common Socage [or seised
or possessed for my own Use and Benefit of Lands or Tenements held in
Franc-alleu or in Roture (as the Case may be),] in the Province of
Nova Scotia [or as the Case may be] of the Value of Four thousand
Dollars over and above all Rents, Dues, Debts, Mortgages, Charges, and
Incumbrances due or payable out of or charged on or affecting the same,
and that I have not collusively or colourably obtained a Title to or
become possessed of the said Lands and Tenements or any Part thereof
for the Purpose of enabling me to become a Member of the Senate of
Canada [or as the Case may be], and that my Real and Personal Property
are together worth Four thousand Dollars over and above my Debts and
Liabilities.







End of Project Gutenberg's The British North America Act, 1867, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT ***

***** This file should be named 5984.txt or 5984.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/5/9/8/5984/

This eBook was produced by Andrew Sly.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

