The Project Gutenberg EBook of At The Sign Of The Eagle, by Gilbert Parker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: At The Sign Of The Eagle

Author: Gilbert Parker

Last Updated: March 13, 2009
Release Date: October 18, 2006 [EBook #6218]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT THE SIGN OF THE EAGLE ***



Produced by David Widger





AT THE SIGN OF THE EAGLE

By Gilbert Parker



          "Life in her creaking shoes
          Goes, and more formal grows,
          A round of calls and cues:
          Love blows as the wind blows.
          Blows!..."



"Well, what do you think of them, Molly?" said Sir Duke Lawless to his
wife, his eyes resting with some amusement on a big man and a little one
talking to Lord Hampstead.

"The little man is affected, gauche, and servile. The big one
picturesque and superior in a raw kind of way. He wishes to be rude
to some one, and is disappointed because, just at the moment, Lord
Hampstead is too polite to give him his cue. A dangerous person in a
drawing-room, I should think; but interesting. You are a bold man to
bring them here, Duke. Is it not awkward for our host?"

"Hampstead did it with his eyes open. Besides, there is business behind
it--railways, mines, and all that; and Hampstead's nephew is going to
the States fortune-hunting. Do you see?"

Lady Lawless lifted her eyebrows. "'To what base uses are we come,
Horatio!' You invite me to dinner and--'I'll fix things up right.' That
is the proper phrase, for I have heard you use it. Status for dollars.
Isn't it low? I know you do not mean what you say, Duke."

Sir Duke's eyes were playing on the men with a puzzled expression, as
though trying to read the subject of their conversation; and he did not
reply immediately. Soon, however, he turned and looked down at his wife
genially, and said: "Well, that's about it, I suppose. But really there
is nothing unusual in this, so far as Mr. John Vandewaters is concerned,
for in his own country he travels 'the parlours of the Four Hundred,'
and is considered 'a very elegant gentleman.' We must respect a man
according to the place he holds in his own community. Besides, as you
suggest, Mr. Vandewaters is interesting. I might go further, and say
that he is a very good fellow indeed."

"You will be asking him down to Craigruie next," said Lady Lawless,
inquisition in her look.

"That is exactly what I mean to do, with your permission, my dear. I
hope to see him laying about among the grouse in due season."

"My dear Duke, you are painfully Bohemian. I can remember when you were
perfectly precise and exclusive, and--"

"What an awful prig I must have been!"

"Don't interrupt. That was before you went aroving in savage countries,
and picked up all sorts of acquaintances, making friends with the most
impossible folk. I should never be surprised to see you drive Shon
McGann--and his wife, of course--and Pretty Pierre--with some other
man's wife--up to the door in a dogcart; their clothes in a saddle-bag,
or something less reputable, to stay a month. Duke, you have lost your
decorum; you are a gipsy."

"I fear Shon McGann and Pierre wouldn't enjoy being with us as I should
enjoy having them. You can never understand what a life that is out in
Pierre's country. If it weren't for you and the bairn, I should be
off there now. There is something of primeval man in me. I am never so
healthy and happy, when away from you, as in prowling round the outposts
of civilisation, and living on beans and bear's meat."

He stretched to his feet, and his wife rose with him. There was a fine
colour on his cheek, and his eye had a pleasant fiery energy. His wife
tapped him on the arm with her fan. She understood him very well, though
pretending otherwise. "Duke, you are incorrigible. I am in daily dread
of your starting off in the middle of the night, leaving me--"

"Watering your couch with your tears?"

"--and hearing nothing more from you till a cable from Quebec or
Winnipeg tells me that you are on your way to the Arctic Circle with
Pierre or some other heathen. But, seriously, where did you meet Mr.
Vandewaters--Heavens, what a name!--and that other person? And what is
the other person's name?"

"The other person carries the contradictory name of Stephen Pride."

"Why does he continually finger his face, and show his emotions so? He
assents to everything said to him by an appreciative exercise of his
features."

"My dear, you ask a great and solemn question. Let me introduce the
young man, that you may get your answer at the fountain-head."

"Wait a moment, Duke. Sit down and tell me when and where you met these
men, and why you have continued the acquaintance."

"Molly," he said, obeying her, "you are a terrible inquisitor, and the
privacy of one's chamber were the kinder place to call one to account.
But I bend to your implacability.... Mr. Vandewaters, like myself, has
a taste for roving, though our aims are not identical. He has a
fine faculty for uniting business and pleasure. He is not a thorough
sportsman--there is always a certain amount of enthusiasm, even in the
unrewarded patience of the true hunter; but he sufficeth. Well, Mr.
Vandewaters had been hunting in the far north, and looking after a
promising mine at the same time. He was on his way south at one angle,
I at another angle, bound for the same point. Shon McGann was with me;
Pierre with Vandewaters. McGann left me, at a certain point, to join his
wife at a Barracks of the Riders of the Plains. I had about a hundred
miles to travel alone. Well, I got along the first fifty all right.
Then came trouble. In a bad place of the hills I fell and broke an ankle
bone. I had an Eskimo dog of the right sort with me. I wrote a line on
a bit of birch bark, tied it round his neck, and started him away,
trusting my luck that he would pull up somewhere. He did. He ran into
Vandewaters's camp that evening. Vandewaters and Pierre started away at
once. They had dogs, and reached me soon.

"It was the first time I had seen Pierre for years. They fixed me up,
and we started south. And that's as it was in the beginning with Mr.
John Vandewaters and me."

Lady Lawless had been watching the two strangers during the talk, though
once or twice she turned and looked at her husband admiringly. When he
had finished she said: "That is very striking. What a pity it is that
men we want to like spoil all by their lack of form!"

"Don't be so sure about Vandewaters. Does he look flurried by these
surroundings?"

"No. He certainly has an air of contentment. It is, I suppose, the usual
air of self-made Americans."

"Go to London, E.C., and you will find the same, plus smugness. Now, Mr.
Vandewaters has real power--and taste too, as you will see. Would you
think Mr. Stephen Pride a self-made man?"

"I cannot think of any one else who would be proud of the patent. Please
to consider the seals about his waistcoat, and the lady-like droop of
his shoulders."

"Yet he is thought to be a young man of parts. He has money, made by
his ancestors; he has been round the world; he belongs to societies for
culture and--"

"And he will rave of the Poet's Corner, ask if one likes Pippa Passes,
and expect to be introduced to every woman in the room at a tea-party,
to say nothing of proposing impossible things, such as taking one's girl
friends to the opera alone, sending them boxes of confectionery, and
writing them dreadfully reverential notes at the same time. Duke, the
creature is impossible, believe me. Never, never, if you love me, invite
him to Craigruie. I met one of his tribe at Lady Macintyre's when I was
just out of school; and at the dinner-table, when the wine went round,
he lifted his voice and asked for a cup of tea, saying he never 'drank.'
Actually he did, Duke."

Her husband laughed quietly. He had a man's enjoyment of a woman's
dislike of bad form. "A common criminal man, Molly. Tell me, which is
the greater crime: to rob a bank or use a fish-knife for asparagus?"

Lady Lawless fanned herself. "Duke, you make me hot. But if you will
have the truth: the fish-knife business by all means. Nobody need feel
uncomfortable about the burglary, except the burglar; but see what a
position for the other person's hostess."

"My dear, women have no civic virtues. Their credo is, 'I believe in
beauty and fine linen, and the thing that is not gauche.'"

His wife was smiling. "Well, have it your own way. It is a creed of
comfort, at any rate. And now, Duke, if I must meet the man of mines and
railways and the spare person making faces at Lord Hampstead, let it be
soon, that it may be done with; and pray don't invite them to Craigruie
till I have a chance to speak with you again. I will not have impossible
people at a house-party."

"What a difficult fellow your husband is, Molly!"

"Difficult; but perfectly possible. His one fault is a universal
sympathy which shines alike on the elect--and the others."

"So. Well, this is our dance. After it is over, prepare for the
Americanos."

Half-an-hour later Mr. Vandewaters was standing in a conspicuous corner
talking to Lady Lawless.

"It is, then, your first visit to England?" she asked. He had a dry,
deliberate voice, unlike the smooth, conventional voices round him.
"Yes, Lady Lawless," he replied: "it's the first time I've put my foot
in London town, and--perhaps you won't believe it of an American--I find
it doesn't take up a very conspicuous place."

The humour was slightly accentuated, and Lady Lawless shrank a little,
as if she feared the depths of divertisement to which this speech might
lead; but a quick look at the man assured her of his common-sense, and
she answered: "It is of the joys of London that no one is so important
but finds the space he fills a small one, which may be filled acceptably
by some one else at any moment. It is easy for kings and princes
even--we have secluded princes here now--to get lost and forgotten in
London." "Well, that leaves little chance for ordinary Americans, who
don't bank on titles."

She looked up, puzzled in spite of herself. But she presently said, with
frankness and naivete: "What does 'bank on titles' mean?"

He stroked his beard, smiling quaintly, and said: "I don't know how to
put the thing better-it seems to fill the bill. But, anyway, Americans
are republicans; and don't believe in titles, and--"

"O, pardon me," she interrupted: "of course, I see."

"We've got little ways of talking not the same as yours. You don't seem
to have the snap to conversation that we have in the States. But I'll
say here that I think you have got a better style of talking. It isn't
exhausting."

"Mr. Pride said to me a moment ago that they spoke better English in
Boston than any other place in the world."

"Did he, though, Lady Lawless? That's good. Well, I guess he was only
talking through his hat."

She was greatly amused. Her first impressions were correct. The man was
interesting. He had a quaint, practical mind. He had been thrown upon
his own resources, since infancy almost, in a new country; and he
had seen with his own eyes, nakedly, and without predisposition or
instruction. From childhood thoroughly adaptable, he could get into
touch with things quickly, and instantly like or dislike them. He had
been used to approach great concerns with fearlessness and competency.
He respected a thing only for its real value, and its intrinsic value
was as clear to him as the market value. He had, perhaps, an exaggerated
belief in the greatness of his own country, because he liked eagerness
and energy and daring. The friction and hurry of American life added to
his enjoyment. They acted on him like a stimulating air, in which he
was always bold, collected, and steady. He felt an exhilaration in being
superior to the rustle of forces round him. It had been his habit to
play the great game of business with decision and adroitness. He had
not spared his opponent in the fight; he had crushed where his interests
were in peril and the sport played into his hands; comforting himself,
if he thought of the thing, with the knowledge that he himself would
have been crushed if the other man had not. He had never been wilfully
unfair, nor had he used dishonourable means to secure his ends: his name
stood high in his own country for commercial integrity; men said: he
"played square." He had, maybe, too keen a contempt for dulness and
incompetency in enterprise, and he loathed red-tape; but this
was racial. His mind was as open as his manners. He was utterly
approachable. He was a millionaire, and yet in his own offices in New
York he was as accessible as a President. He handled things without
gloves, and this was not a good thing for any that came to him with a
weak case. He had a penetrating intelligence; and few men attempted,
after their first sophistical statements, to impose upon him: he sent
them away unhappy. He did not like England altogether: first, because it
lacked, as he said, enterprise; and because the formality, decorum and
excessive convention fretted him. He saw that in many things the old
land was backward, and he thought that precious time was being wasted.
Still, he could see that there were things, purely social, in which
the Londoners were at advantage; and he acknowledged this when he said,
concerning Stephen Pride's fond boast, that he was "talking through his
hat."

Lady Lawless smiled, and after a moment rejoined:

"Does it mean that he was mumming, as it were, like a conjurer?"

"Exactly. You are pretty smart, Lady Lawless; for I can see that, from
your stand-point, it isn't always easy to catch the meaning of sayings
like that. But they do hit the case, don't they?"

"They give a good deal of individuality to conversation," was the vague
reply. "What, do you think, is the chief lack in England?"

"Nerve and enterprise. But I'm not going to say you ought to have the
same kind of nerve as ours. We are a different tribe, with different
surroundings, and we don't sit in the same kind of saddle. We ride for
all we're worth all the time. You sit back and take it easy. We are
never satisfied unless we are behind a fast trotter; you are
content with a good cob that steps high, tosses its head, and has an
aristocratic stride."

"Have you been in the country much?" she asked, without any seeming
relevancy.

He was keen enough. He saw the veiled point of her question. "No: I've
never been in the country here," he said. "I suppose you mean that I
don't see or know England till I've lived there."

"Quite so, Mr. Vandewaters." She smiled to think what an undistinguished
name it was. It suggested pumpkins in the front garden. Yet here its
owner was perfectly at his ease, watching the scene before him
with good-natured superiority. "London is English; but it is very
cosmopolitan, you know," she added; "and I fancy you can see it is not a
place for fast trotters. The Park would be too crowded for that--even if
one wished to drive a Maud S."

He turned his slow keen eyes on her, and a smile broadened into a low
laugh, out of which he said:

"What do you know of Maud S? I didn't think you would be up in racing
matters."

"You forget that my husband is a traveller, and an admirer of Americans
and things American."

"That's so," he answered; "and a staving good traveller he is. You don't
catch him asleep, I can tell you, Lady Lawless. He has stuff in him."

"The stuff to make a good American?"

"Yes; with something over. He's the kind of Englishman that can keep
cool when things are ticklish, and look as if he was in a parlour all
the time. Americans keep cool, but look cheeky. O, I know that. We
square our shoulders and turn out our toes, and push our hands into
our pockets, and act as if we owned the world. Hello--by Jingo!" Then,
apologetically: "I beg your pardon, Lady Lawless; it slipped."

Lady Lawless followed Mr. Vandewaters's glance, and saw, passing on
her husband's arm, a tall, fascinating girl. She smiled meaningly to
herself, as she sent a quick quizzical look at the American, and said,
purposely misinterpreting his exclamation: "I am not envious, Mr.
Vandewaters."

"Of course not. That's a commoner thing with us than with you. American
girls get more notice and attention from their cradles up, and they
want it all along the line. You see, we've mostly got the idea that an
Englishman expects from his wife what an American woman expects from her
husband."

"How do Americans get these impressions about us?"

"From our newspapers, I guess; and the newspapers take as the
ground-work of their belief the Bow Street cases where Englishmen are
cornered for beating their wives."

"Suppose we were to judge of American Society by the cases in a Chicago
Divorce Court?"

"There you have me on toast. That's what comes of having a husband who
takes American papers. Mind you, I haven't any idea that the American
papers are right. I've had a lot to do with newspapers, and they are
pretty ignorant, I can tell you--cheap all round. What's a newspaper,
anyway, but an editor, more or less smart and overworked, with an owner
behind him who has got some game on hand? I know: I've been there."

"How have you 'been there'?"

"I've owned four big papers all at once, and had fifty others under my
thumb."

Lady Lawless caught her breath; but she believed him. "You must be very
rich."

"Owning newspapers doesn't mean riches. It's a lever, though, for
tipping the dollars your way."

"I suppose they have--tipped your way?"

"Yes: pretty well. But, don't follow this lead any farther, Lady
Lawless, or you may come across something that will give you a start. I
should like to keep on speaking terms with you."

"You mean that a man cannot hold fifty newspapers under his thumb, and
live in the glare of a search-light also?"

"Exactly. You can't make millions without pulling wires."

She saw him watching the girl on her husband's arm. She had the
instinct of her sex. She glanced at the stately girl again; then at
Mr. Vandewaters critically, and rejoined, quizzically: "Did you--make
millions?"

His eyes still watching, he replied abstractedly. "Yes: a few handfuls,
and lost a few--'that's why I'm here.'"

"To get them back on the London market?"

"That's why I am here."

"You have not come in vain?"

"I could tell you better in a month or so from now. In any case, I don't
stand to lose. I've come to take things away from England."

"I hope you will take away a good opinion of it."

"If there'd been any doubt of it half an hour ago, it would be all gone
this minute."

"Which is nice of you; and not in your usual vein, I should think. But,
Mr. Vandewaters, we want you to come to Craigruie, our country place, to
spend a week. Then you will have a chance to judge us better, or rather
more broadly and effectively." She was looking at the girl, and at that
moment she caught Sir Duke's eye. She telegraphed to him to come.

"Thank you, Lady Lawless, I'm glad you have asked me. But--" He glanced
to where Mr. Pride was being introduced to the young lady on Sir Duke's
arm, and paused.

"We are hoping," she added, interpreting his thought, and speaking a
little dryly, "that your friend, Mr. Stephen Pride"--the name sounded so
ludicrous--"will join us."

"He'll be proud enough, you may be sure. It's a singular combination,
Pride and myself, isn't it? But, you see, he has a fortune which, as
yet, he has never been able to handle for himself; and I do it for him.
We are partners, and, though you mightn't think it, he has got more
money now than when he put his dollars at my disposal to help me make a
few millions at a critical time."

Lady Lawless let her fan touch Mr. Vandewaters's arm. "I am going to
do you a great favour. You see that young lady coming to us with
my husband? Well, I am going to introduce you to her. It is such as
she--such women--who will convince you--"

"Yes?"

"--that you have yet to make your--what shall I call it?--Ah, I have it:
your 'biggest deal,'--and, in truth, your best."

"Is that so?" rejoined Vandewaters musingly. "Is that so? I always
thought I'd make my biggest deal in the States. Who is she? She is
handsome."

"She is more than handsome, and she is the Honourable Gracia Raglan."

"I don't understand about 'The Honourable.'"

"I will explain that another time."

A moment later Miss Raglan, in a gentle bewilderment, walked down the
ballroom on the arm of the millionaire, half afraid that something
gauche would happen; but by the time she had got to the other end was
reassured, and became interested.

Sir Duke said to his wife in an aside, before he left her with Mr.
Vandewaters's financial partner: "What is your pretty conspiracy,
Molly?"

"Do talk English, Duke, and do not interfere."

A few hours later, on the way home, Sir Duke said: "You asked Mr. Pride
too?"

"Yes; I grieve to say."

"Why grieve?"

"Because his experiences with us seem to make him dizzy. He will be
terribly in earnest with every woman in the house, if--"

"If you do not keep him in line yourself?"

"Quite so. And the creature is not even interesting."

"Cast your eye about. He has millions; you have cousins."

"You do not mean that, Duke? I would see them in their graves first. He
says 'My lady' every other sentence, and wants to send me flowers, and a
box for the opera, and to drive me in the Park."

Her husband laughed. "I'll stake my life he can't ride. You will have
him about the place like a tame cat." Then, seeing that his wife was
annoyed: "Never mind, Molly, I will help you all I can. I want to be
kind to them."

"I know you do. But what is your 'pretty conspiracy,' Duke?"

"A well-stocked ranche in Colorado." He did not mean it. And she knew
it.

"How can you be so mercenary?" she replied.

Then they both laughed, and said that they were like the rest of the
world.



II

Lady Lawless was an admirable hostess, and she never appeared to better
advantage in the character than during the time when Miss Gracia Raglan,
Mr. John Vandewaters, and Mr. Stephen Pride were guests at Craigruie.
The men accepted Mr. Vandewaters at once as a good fellow and a very
sensible man. He was a heavy-weight for riding; but it was not the
hunting season, and, when they did ride, a big horse carried him very
well. At grouse-shooting he showed to advantage. Mr. Pride never rode.
He went shooting only once, and then, as Mr. Vandewaters told him, he
got "rattled." He was then advised by his friend to remain at home
and cultivate his finer faculties. At the same time, Mr. Vandewaters
parenthetically remarked to Sir Duke Lawless that Mr. Pride knew the
poets backwards, and was smart at French. He insisted on bringing out
the good qualities of his comrade; but he gave him much strong advice
privately. He would have done it just the same at the risk of losing
a fortune, were it his whim--he would have won the fortune back in due
course.

At the present time Mr. Vandewaters was in the heat of some large
commercial movements. No one would have supposed it, save for the fact
that telegrams and cablegrams were brought to him day and night. He had
liberally salaried the telegraph-clerk to work after hours, simply to
be at his service. The contents of these messages never shook his
equanimity. He was quiet, urbane, dry-mannered, at all times. Mr. Pride,
however, was naturally excitable. He said of himself earnestly that he
had a sensitive nature. He said it to Mrs. Gregory Thorne, whose reply
was: "Dear me, and when things are irritating and painful to you do you
never think of suicide?" Then she turned away to speak to some one, as
if she had been interrupted, and intended to take up the subject again;
but she never did. This remark caused Mr. Pride some nervous moments.
He was not quite sure how she meant it. But it did not depress him as it
might otherwise have done, for his thoughts were running much in another
channel with a foolish sort of elation.

As Lady Lawless had predicted, he was assiduously attentive to her, and
it needed all her tact and cheerful frankness to keep him in line. She
managed it very well: Mr. Pride's devotion was not too noticeable to
the other guests. She tried to turn his attentions to some pretty girls;
but, although there were one or two who might, in some weak moments,
have compromised with his millions, he did no more than saunter with
them on the terrace and oppress them with his lisping egotism. Every one
hinted that he seemed an estimable, but trying, young man; and, as Sir
Duke said to his wife, the men would not have him at any price.

As for Mr. Vandewaters and Gracia Raglan, Lady Lawless was not very sure
that her delicate sympathy was certain of reward. The two were naturally
thrown together a good deal; but Miss Raglan was a girl of singular
individuality and high-mindedness, and she was keen enough to see from
the start what Lady Lawless suspected might happen. She did not resent
this,--she was a woman; but it roused in her a spirit of criticism, and
she threw up a barrier of fine reserve, which puzzled Mr. Vandewaters.
He did not see that Lady Lawless was making a possible courtship easy
for him. If he had, it would have made no difference: he would have
looked at it as at most things, broadly. He was not blind to the fact
that his money might be a "factor", but, as he said to himself, his
millions were a part of him--they represented, like whist-counters, so
much pluck and mother-wit. He liked the general appreciation of them: he
knew very well that people saw him in them and them in him. Miss Raglan
attracted him from the moment of meeting. She was the first woman of her
class that he had ever met closely; and the possibility of having as his
own so adorable a comrade was inspiring. He sat down sometimes as the
days went on--it was generally when he was shaving--and thought upon his
intention regarding Miss Raglan, in relation to his humble past; for
he had fully made up his mind to marry her, if she would have him.
He wondered what she would think when he told her of his life; and he
laughed at the humour of the situation. He had been into Debrett, and he
knew that she could trace her family back to the Crusades.

He determined to make a clean breast of it. One day he was obliged to
remain at the house in expectation of receiving important telegrams, and
the only people who appeared at lunch were Lady Lawless, Mrs. Gregory
Thorne (who was expecting her husband), Miss Raglan; Pride, and himself.
While at luncheon he made up his mind to have a talk with Miss Raglan.
In the library after luncheon the opportunity was given. It was a warm,
pleasant day, and delightful in the grounds.

After one or two vain efforts to escape, Mrs. Gregory Thorne and Lady
Lawless resigned themselves to the attentions of Mr. Pride; and for
once Lady Lawless did not check Mrs. Thorne's irony. It was almost a
satisfaction to see Mr. Pride's bewildered looks, and his inability
to know whether or not he should resent (whether it would be proper to
resent) this softly-showered satire.

Mr. Vandewaters and Gracia Raglan talked more freely than they had ever
done before.

"Do you really like England?" she said to him; then, waving her hand
lightly to the beeches and the clean-cropped grass through the window,
"I mean do you like our 'trim parterres,' our devotion to mere living,
pleasure, sport, squiring, and that sort of thing?"

He raised his head, glanced out, drew in a deep breath, thrust his hands
down in the pockets of his coat, and looking at her with respectful good
humour, said: "Like it? Yes, right down to the ground. Why shouldn't
I! It's the kind of place I should like to come to in my old days. You
needn't die in a hurry here. See?"

"Are you sure you would not be like the old sailors who must live where
they can scent the brine? You have been used to an active, adventurous,
hurried life. Do you think you could endure this humdrum of enjoyment?"

It would be hard to tell quite what was running in Gracia Raglan's mind,
and, for the moment, she herself hardly knew; but she had a sudden,
overmastering wish to make the man talk: to explore and, maybe, find
surprising--even trying--things. She was astonished that she enjoyed his
society so keenly. Even now, as she spoke, she remembered a day and a
night since his coming, when he was absent in London; also how the party
seemed to have lost its character and life, and how, when Mr. Pride
condescended, for a few moments, to decline from Lady Lawless upon
herself, she was even pleasant to him, making him talk about Mr.
Vandewaters, and relishing the enthusiastic loyalty of the supine young
man. She, like Lady Lawless, had learned to see behind the firm bold
exterior, not merely a notable energy, force, self-reliance, and
masterfulness, but a native courtesy, simplicity, and refinement
which surprised her. Of all the men she knew not a half-dozen had an
appreciation of nature or of art. They affected art, and some of them
went to the Academy or the private views in Bond Street; but they had
little feeling for the business. They did it in a well-bred way, with
taste, but not with warmth.

Mr. Vandewaters now startled her by quoting suddenly lines from an
English poet unknown to her. By chance she was turning over the Academy
pictures of the year, and came at last to one called "A Japanese Beauty
of Old Days"--an exquisite thing.

"Is it not fascinating?" she said. "So piquant and fresh."

He gave a silent laugh, as was his custom when he enjoyed anything, and
then replied:

"I came across a little book of verses one day in the States. A friend
of mine, the president of a big railway, gave it to me. He does some
painting himself when he travels in his Pullman in the Rockies. Well, it
had some verses on just such a picture as that. Hits it off right, Miss
Raglan."

"Verses?" she remarked, lifting her eyebrows. She expected something out
of the "poet's corner" of a country newspaper. "What are they?"

"Well, one's enough to show the style. This is it:

       "'Was I a Samurai renowned,
        Two-sworded, fierce, immense of bow?
        A histrion angular and profound?
        A priest? or porter? Child, although
        I have forgotten clean, I know
        That in the shade of Fujisan,
        What time the cherry-orchards blow,
        I loved you once in old Japan.'"

The verse on the lips of Mr. Vandewaters struck her strangely. He was
not like any man she had known. Most self-made Englishmen, with such a
burly exterior and energy, and engaged in such pursuits, could not, to
save themselves from hanging, have impressed her as Mr. Vandewaters did.
There was a big round sympathy in the tone, a timbre in the voice, which
made the words entirely fitting. Besides, he said them without any kind
of affectation, and with a certain turn of dry humour, as if he were
inwardly laughing at the idea of the poem.

"The verses are charming," she said, musingly; "and the idea put that
way is charming also. But do you think there would be much amusement
in living half-a-dozen times, or even twice, unless you were quite sure
that you remembered everything? This gentleman was peculiarly fortunate
to recall Fujisan, and the orange orchards--and the girl."

"I believe you are right. One life is about enough for most of us.
Memory is all very fine; but you'd want a life set apart for remembering
the others after awhile."

"Why do you not add, 'And that would bore one?' Most of the men I know
would say so."

"Well, I never used the word that way in my life. When I don't like a
thing, that ends it--it has got to go."

"You cannot do that with everything."

"Pretty much, if I set my mind to it. It is astonishing how things'll
come round your way if you keep on thinking and willing them so."

"Have you always got everything you wanted?" He had been looking off
into the grounds through the open window. Now he turned slowly upon her.

"So far I have got everything I set my mind to get. Little things don't
count. You lose them sometimes because you want to work at something
else; sometimes because, as in cards, you are throwing a few away to
save the whole game."

He looked at her, as she thought, curiously. In his mind he was
wondering if she knew that he had made up his mind to marry her. She was
suddenly made aware of the masterfulness of his spirit, which might, she
knew, be applied to herself.

"Let us go into the grounds," he added, all at once. Soon after, in
the shade of the trees, she broke in upon the thread of their casual
conversation. "A few moments ago," she murmured, "you said: 'One life is
about enough for most of us.' Then you added a disparaging remark about
memory. Well, that doesn't seem like your usual point of view--more like
that of Mr. Pride; but not so plaintive, of course. Pray do smoke,"
she added, as, throwing back his coat, he exposed some cigars in his
waistcoat pocket. "I am sure you always smoke after lunch."

He took out a cigar, cut off the end, and put it in his mouth. But he
did not light it. Then he glanced up at her with a grave quizzical look
as though wondering what would be the effect of his next words, and a
smile played at his lips.

"What I meant was this. I think we get enough out of our life to last
us for centuries. It's all worth doing from the start, no matter what
it is: working, fighting, marching and countermarching, plotting and
counterplotting, backing your friends and hating your foes, playing
big games and giving others a chance to, standing with your hand on the
lynch-pin, or pulling your head safe out of the hot-pot. But I don't
think it is worth doing twice. The interest wouldn't be fresh. For men
and women and life, with a little different dress, are the same as they
always were; and there's only the same number of passions working now,
as at the beginning. I want to live life up to the hilt; because it is
all new as I go on; but never twice."

"Indeed?" She looked at him earnestly for a moment, and then added: "I
should think you would have seen lost chances; and doing things a second
time might do them better."

"I never missed chances," he replied, simply: "never except twice, and
then--"

"And then?"

"Then it was to give the other fellow a chance."

"Oh!" There was a kind of dubiousness in her tone. He noticed it. "You
can hardly understand, Miss Raglan. Fact is, it was one of those deals
when you can make a million, in a straight enough game; but it comes out
of another man--one, maybe, that you don't know; who is playing just the
same as you are. I have had a lot of sport; but I've never crippled any
one man, when my engine has been dead on him. I have played more against
organisations than single men."

"What was the most remarkable chance you ever had to make a million, and
did not?"

He threw back his head, smiling shrewdly. "When by accident my enemy got
hold of a telegram meant for me. I was standing behind a frosted glass
door, and through the narrow bevel of clear glass I watched him read
it. I never saw a struggle like that. At last he got up, snatched
an envelope, put the telegram inside, wrote my name, and called a
messenger. I knew what was in the message. I let the messenger go, and
watched that man for ten minutes. It was a splendid sight. The telegram
had given him a big chance to make a million or two, as he thought. But
he backed himself against the temptation, and won. That day I could have
put the ball into his wicket; but I didn't. That's a funny case of the
kind."

"Did he ever know?"

"He didn't. We are fighting yet. He is richer than I am now, and at this
moment he's playing a hard game straight at several interests of mine.
But I reckon I can stop him."

"You must get a great deal out of life," she said. "Have you always
enjoyed it so?" She was thinking it would be strange to live in contact
with such events very closely. It was so like adventure.

"Always--from the start."

"Tell me something of it all, won't you?" He did not hesitate.

"I was born in a little place in Maine. My mother was a good woman, they
said--straight as a die all her life. I can only remember her in a
kind of dream, when she used to gather us children about the big
rocking-chair, and pray for us, and for my father, who was away most
of the time, working in the timber-shanties in the winter, and at
odd things in the summer. My father wasn't much of a man. He was
kind-hearted, but shiftless, but pretty handsome for a man from Maine.

"My mother died when I was six years old. Things got bad. I was the
youngest. The oldest was only ten years old. She was the head of the
house. She had the pluck of a woman. We got along somehow, until one
day, when she and I were scrubbing the floor, she caught cold. She died
in three days."

Here he paused; and, without glancing at Miss Raglan, who sat very
still, but looking at him, he lighted his cigar.

"Then things got worse. My father took to drinking hard, and we had
mighty little to eat. I chored around, doing odd things in the village.
I have often wondered that people didn't see the stuff that was in me,
and give me a chance. They didn't, though. As for my relatives: one was
a harness-maker. He sent me out in the dead of winter to post bills for
miles about, and gave me ten cents for it. Didn't even give me a meal.
Twenty years after he came to me and wanted to borrow a hundred dollars.
I gave him five hundred on condition that he'd not come near me for the
rest of his natural life.

"The next thing I did was to leave home--'run away,' I suppose, is the
way to put it. I got to Boston, and went for a cabin-boy on a steamer;
travelled down to Panama, and from there to Brazil. At Brazil I got on
another ship, and came round to San Francisco. I got into trouble in San
Francisco with the chief mate of the Flying Polly, because I tried to
teach him his business. One of the first things I learned in life was
not to interfere with people who had a trade and didn't understand
it. In San Francisco I got out of the situation. I took to selling
newspapers in the streets.

"There wasn't enough money in it. I went for a cabin-boy again, and
travelled to Australia. There, once more, I resigned my position,
chiefly because I wouldn't cheerfully let the Mate bang me about the
quarter-deck. I expect I was a precocious youth, and wasn't exactly
the kind for Sunday-school prizes. In Melbourne I began to speculate.
I found a ticket for the theatre where an American actor--our biggest
actor today--was playing, and I tried to sell it outside the door of the
theatre where they were crowding to see him. The man who bought it was
the actor himself. He gave me two dollars more than the regular price.
I expect he knew from my voice I was an American. Is there anything
peculiar about my voice, Miss Raglan?"

She looked at him quickly, smiled, and said in a low tone: "Yes,
something peculiar. Please go on."

"Well, anyway, he said to me: 'Look here, where did you come from,
my boy?' I told him the State of Maine. 'What are you doing here?' he
asked. 'Speculating, said I, and seeing things.' He looked me up and
down. 'How are you getting on?' 'Well. I've made four dollars to-day,'
I answered. 'Out of this ticket?' I expect I grinned. He suddenly caught
me by the arm and whisked me inside the theatre--the first time I'd ever
been in a theatre in my life. I shall never forget it. He took me around
to his dressing-room, stuck me in a corner, and prodded me with his
forefinger. 'Look here,' he said, 'I guess I'll hire you to speculate
for me.' And that's how I came to get twenty-five dollars a month and
my living from a great American actor. When I got back to America--with
him--I had two hundred and fifty dollars in cash, and good clothes.
I started a peanut-stand, and sold papers and books, and became a
speculator. I heard two men talking one day at my stall about a railway
that was going to run through a certain village, and how they intended
to buy up the whole place. I had four hundred and fifty dollars then.
I went down to that village, and bought some lots myself. I made four
thousand dollars. Then I sold more books, and went on speculating."

He paused, blew his cigar-smoke slowly from him a moment; then turned
with a quick look to Miss Raglan, and smiled as at some incongruous
thing. He was wondering what would be the effect of his next words.

"When I was about twenty-two, and had ten thousand dollars, I fell
in love. She was a bright-faced, smart girl. Her mother kept a
boarding-house in New York; not an up-town boarding-house. She waited on
table. I suppose a man can be clever in making money, and knowing how
to handle men, and not know much about women. I thought she was worth
a good deal more to me than the ten thousand dollars. She didn't know
I had that money. A drummer--that's a commercial traveller--came along,
who had a salary of, maybe, a thousand dollars a year. She jilted me.
She made a mistake. That year I made twenty-five thousand dollars. I saw
her a couple of years ago. She was keeping a boarding-house too, and her
daughter was waiting on table. I'm sorry for that girl: it isn't any fun
being poor. I didn't take much interest in women after that. I put my
surplus affections into stocks and shares, and bulling and bearing...
Well, that is the way the thing has gone till now."

"What became of your father and your brother?" she asked in a neutral
tone.

"I don't know anything about my father. He disappeared after I left, and
never turned up again. And Jim--poor Jim!--he was shiftless. Jim was a
tanner. It was no good setting him up in business. Steady income was the
cheapest way. But Jim died of too much time on his hands. His son is
in Mexico somewhere. I sent him there, and I hope he'll stay. If he
doesn't, his salary stops: he is shiftless too. That is not the kind of
thing, and they are not the kind of people you know best, Miss Raglan."

He looked at her, eyes full-front, bravely, honestly, ready to face the
worst. Her head was turned away.

He nodded to himself. It was as he feared.

At that moment a boy came running along the walk towards them, and
handed Mr. Vandewaters a telegram. He gave the lad a few pence, then,
with an apology, opened the telegram. Presently he whistled softly, in
a quick surprised way. Then he stuffed the paper into his waistcoat
pocket, threw away his cigar, and turned to Gracia Raglan, whose face as
yet was only half towards him. "I hope your news is good," she said very
quietly.

"Pretty bad, in a way," he answered. "I have lost a couple of
millions--maybe a little more."

She gasped, and turned an astonished face on him. He saw her startled
look, and laughed.

"Does it not worry you?" she asked.

"I have got more important things on hand just now," he answered. "Very
much more important," he added, and there was that in his voice which
made her turn away her head again.

"I suppose," he went on, "that the story you have just heard is not
the kind of an autobiography you would care to have told in your
drawing-room?"

Still she did not reply; but her hands were clasped tightly in front of
her. "No: I suppose not," he went on--"I--I suppose not. And yet, do you
know, Miss Raglan, I don't feel a bit ashamed of it, after all: which
may be evidence of my lost condition."

Now she turned to him with a wonderful light in her eyes, her sweet,
strong face rich with feeling. She put out her hand to his arm, and
touched it quickly, nervously.

"Your story has touched me inexpressibly," she said. "I did not know
that men could be so strong and frank and courageous as you. I did not
know that men could be so great; that any man could think more of what
a woman thought of--of his life's story--than of"--she paused, and then
gave a trembling little laugh--"of two millions or more."

He got to his feet, and faced her. "You--you are a woman, by heaven!" he
said. "You are finer even than I thought you. I am not worthy to ask you
what I had in my mind to ask you; but there is no man in God's universe
who would prize you as I do. I may be a poor man before sundown. If
that happens, though, I shall remember the place where I had the biggest
moment of my life, and the woman who made that moment possible."

Now she also rose. There was a brave high look in her face; but her
voice shook a little as she said: "You have never been a coward, why be
a coward now?"

Smiling, he slowly answered: "I wouldn't if I were sure about my
dollars."

She did not reply, but glanced down, not with coquetry, but because she
could not stand the furnace of his eyes.

"You said a moment ago," she ventured, "that you have had one big moment
in your life. Oughtn't it to bring you good fortune?"

"It will--it will," he said, reaching his hand towards hers.

"No, no," she rejoined archly. "I am going. Please do not follow me."
Then, over her shoulder, as she left him: "If you have luck, I shall
want a subscription for my hospital."

"As many thousands as you like," he answered: then, as she sped away: "I
will have her, and the millions too!" adding reminiscently: "Yes, Lady
Lawless, this is my biggest deal."

He tramped to the stables, asked for and got a horse, and rode away to
the railway station. It was dinner time when he got back. He came down
to dinner late, apologising to Lady Lawless as he did so. Glancing
across the table at Mr. Pride, he saw a peculiar excited look in the
young man's face.

"The baby fool!" he said to himself. "He's getting into mischief. I'll
startle him. If he knows that an army of his dollars is playing at
fox-and-geese, he'll not make eyes at Lady Lawless this way--little
ass."

Lady Lawless appeared oblivious of the young man's devotional exercises.
She was engaged on a more congenial theme. In spite of Miss Raglan's
excellent acting, she saw that something had occurred. Mr. Vandewaters
was much the same as usual, save that his voice had an added ring. She
was not sure that all was right; but she was determined to know. Sir
Duke was amused generally. He led a pretty by-play with Mrs. Gregory
Thorne, of whom he asked the details of the day, much to the
confusion, not admirably hid, of Mr. Pride; lamenting now and then Mr.
Vandewaters's absence from the shooting.

Mr. Vandewaters was cool enough. He said that he had been playing at
nine-pins with railways, which was good enough sport for him. Soon after
dinner, he was handed two telegrams. He glanced slowly up at Pride, as
if debating whether to tell him something. He evidently decided against
it, and, excusing himself by saying he was off to take a little walk in
Wall Street, went away to the telegraph office, where he stayed three
hours.

The magnitude of the concerns, the admirable stoicism with which
he received alarming news, his dry humour while they waited between
messages--all were so unlike anything the telegraph-clerk had ever seen,
or imagined, that the thing was like a preposterous dream. Even when,
at last, a telegram came which the clerk vaguely felt was, somehow, like
the fall of an empire, Mr. Vandewaters remained unmoved. Then he sent
one more telegram, gave the clerk a pound, asked that the reply be sent
to him as soon as it came, and went away, calmly smoking his cigar.

It was a mild night. When he got to the house he found some of the
guests walking on the veranda. He joined them; but Miss Raglan was not
with them; nor were Lady Lawless and Mr. Pride. He wanted to see
all three, and so he went into the house. There was no one in the
drawing-room. He reached the library in time to hear Lady Lawless say
to Mr. Pride, who was disappearing through another door: "You had better
ask advice of Mr. Vandewaters."

The door closed. Mr. Vandewaters stepped forward.

He understood the situation. "I guess I know how to advise him, Lady
Lawless," he said.

She turned on him quietly, traces of hauteur in her manner. Her
self-pride had been hurt. "You have heard?" she asked.

"Only your last words, Lady Lawless. They were enough. I feel guilty in
having brought him here."

"You need not. I was glad to have your friend. He is young and effusive.
Let us say no more about it.

"He is tragically repentant; which is a pity. There is no reason why he
should not stay, and be sensible. Why should young men lose their heads,
and be so absurdly earnest?"

"Another poser, Lady Lawless."

"In all your life you never misunderstood things so, I am sure."

"Well, there is no virtue in keeping your head steady. I have spent most
of my life wooing Madame Fortune; I find that makes a man canny."

"She has been very kind to you."

"Perhaps it would surprise you if I told you that at this moment I am
not worth ten thousand dollars." She looked greatly astonished. "I do
not understand," she said. She was thinking of what this might mean to
Gracia Raglan.

"You see I've been playing games at a disadvantage with some ruffians
at New York. They have combined and got me into a corner. I have made my
last move. If it comes out right I shall be richer than ever; if not I
must begin all over again."

Lady Lawless looked at him curiously. She had never met a man like him
before. His power seemed almost Napoleonic; his imperturbability was
absolute. Yet she noticed something new in him. On one side a kind of
grim forcefulness; on the other, a quiet sort of human sympathy. The
one, no doubt, had to do with the momentous circumstances amid which he
was placed; the other, with an event which she had, perhaps prematurely,
anticipated.

"I wonder--I wonder at you," she said. "How do you keep so cool while
such tremendous things are happening?"

"Because I believe in myself, Lady Lawless. I have had to take my
measure a good many times in this world. I never was defeated through my
own stupidity. It has been the sheer luck of the game."

"You do not look like a gamester," she said.

"I guess it's all pretty much a game in life, if you look at it right.
It is only a case of playing fair or foul."

"I never heard any Englishmen talk as you do."

"Very likely not," he responded. "I don't want to be unpleasant; but
most Englishmen work things out by the rule their fathers taught them,
and not by native ingenuity. It is native wit that tells in the end, I'm
thinking."

"Perhaps you are right," she rejoined. "There must be a kind of genius
in it." Here her voice dropped a little lower. "I do not believe there
are many Englishmen, even if they had your dollars--"

"The dollars I had this morning," he interposed.

"--who could have so strongly impressed Gracia Raglan."

He looked thoughtfully on the ground; then raised his eyes to Lady
Lawless, and said in a low, ringing tone:

"Yes, I am going to do more than 'impress': I am going to convince her."

"When?" she asked.

"To-morrow morning, I hope," was the reply. "I believe I shall have my
millions again."

"If you do," she said slowly, "do you not think that you ought to run no
more risks--for her sake?"

"That is just what I mean to do, Lady Lawless. I'll settle millions
where they ought to be settled, drop Wall Street, and--go into
training."

"Into training?" she asked.

"Yes, for a house on the Hudson, a villa at Cannes, a residence in
Grosvenor Square, and a place in Devonshire--or somewhere else. Then,"
he added, with a twinkle in his eye, "I shall need a good deal of time
to cultivate accent."

"Don't!" she said. "You are much more charming as you are."

They passed into the drawing-room.

"Are these things to be told?" she asked, with a little suggestion in
her voice.

"I can trust your discretion."

"Even in such circumstances?" she asked. She paused, with a motion of
her fan back towards the room they had left.

"You have taught him a lesson, Lady Lawless. It is rough on him; but he
needs it."

"I hope he will do nothing rash," she said.

"Perhaps he'll write some poetry, and refuse to consider his natural
appetite."

"Will you go and see him now?" she asked. "Immediately. Good night, Lady
Lawless." His big hand swallowed hers in a firm, friendly clasp, and
he shook it once or twice before he parted from her. He met Sir Duke
Lawless in the doorway. They greeted cheerfully, and then Lawless came
up to his wife.

"Well, my dear," he said, with an amused look in his face, "well, what
news?"

She lifted her eyebrows at him.

"Something has happened, Molly, I can see it in your face."

She was very brief. "Gracia Raglan has been conquered; the young man
from Boston has been foolish; and Mr. Vandewaters has lost millions."

"Eh? That's awkward," said Sir Duke.

"Which?" asked his wife.

Vandewaters found Mr. Pride in his bedroom, a waif of melancholy. He
drew a chair up, lighted a cigar, eyed the young man from head to foot,
and then said: "Pride, have you got any backbone? If you have, brace up.
You are ruined. That's about as mild as I can put it."

"You know all?"--said the young man helplessly, his hands clasped
between his knees in aesthetic agony.

"Yes; I know more than you do, as you will find out. You're a nice sort
of man, to come into a man's house, in a strange land, and make love
to his wife. Now, what do you think of yourself? You're a nice
representative of the American, aren't you?"

"I--I didn't mean any harm--I--couldn't help it," replied the stricken
boy.

"O, for God's sake, drop that bib-and-tucker twaddle! Couldn't help it!
Every scoundrel, too weak to face the consequences of his sin, says he
couldn't help it. So help me, Joseph, I'd like to thrash you. Couldn't
help it! Now, sit up in your chair, take this cigar, drink this glass of
whiskey I'm pouring for you, and make up your mind that you're going to
be a man and not a nincompoop--sit still! Don't fly up. I mean what I
say. I've got business to talk to you. And make up your mind that, for
once, you have got to take life seriously."

"What right have you to speak to me like this?" demanded the young man
with an attempt at dignity. Vandewaters laughed loudly.

"Right? Great Scott! The right of a man who thinks a damned sight more
of your reputation than you do yourself, and of your fortune than you
would ever have wits to do. I am the best friend you've got, and not the
less your friend because I feel like breaking your ribs. Now, enough of
that. This is what I have to say, Pride: to-night you and I are beggars.
You understand? Beggars. Out in the cold world, out in the street. Now,
what do you think of that?"

The shock to Mr. Pride was great. Mr. Vandewaters had exaggerated the
disaster; but he had done it with a purpose. The youth gasped "My God!"
and dropped his glass. Vandewaters picked it up, and regarded him a
moment in silence. Then he began to explain their financial position. He
did not explain the one bold stroke which he was playing to redeem their
fortunes: if possible. When he had finished the story, he said, "I guess
that's a bit more serious than the little affair in the library half an
hour ago?"

He rose to his feet. "Look here, Pride, be a man. You've never tried
it yet. Let me teach you how to face the world without a dollar; how to
make a fortune. Then, when you've made it, you'll get what you've never
had yet--the pleasure of spending money dug out of your own wits."

He carried conviction into a mind not yet all destroyed by effeminacy
and indulgence of the emotions. Something of the iron of his own brain
got into the brain of the young man, who came to his feet trembling a
little, and said: "I don't mind it so much, if you only stick to me,
Vandewaters."

A smile flickered about the corners of Vandewaters's mouth.

"Take a little more whiskey," he said; "then get into bed, and go to
sleep. No nonsense, remember; go to sleep. To-morrow morning we will
talk. And see here, my boy,"--he caught him by both arms and fastened
his eyes,--"you have had a lesson: learn it backwards. Good night."

Next morning Mr. Vandewaters was early in the grounds. He chatted with
the gardener, and discussed the merits of the horses with the groom,
apparently at peace with the world. Yet he was watching vigilantly
the carriage-drive from the public-road. Just before breakfast-time a
telegraph messenger appeared. Vandewaters was standing with Sir Duke
Lawless when the message was handed to him. He read it, put it into his
pocket, and went on talking. Presently he said: "My agent is coming
from town this morning, Sir Duke. I may have to leave to-night." Then he
turned, and went to his room.

Lady Lawless had heard his last words.

"What about your ranche in Colorado, Duke?"

"About as sure, I fancy, as your millionaire for Gracia."

Miss Raglan did not appear at breakfast with the rest. Neither did Mr.
Pride, who slept late that morning. About ten o'clock Mr. Vandewaters's
agent arrived. About twelve o'clock Mr. Vandewaters saw Miss Raglan
sitting alone in the library. He was evidently looking for her. He came
up to her quietly, and put a piece of paper in her lap.

"What is this?" she asked, a little startled.

"A thousand for your hospital," was the meaning reply.

She flushed, and came to her feet.

"I have won," he said.

And then he reached out and took both her hands.


   ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

   But I don't think it is worth doing twice
   He wishes to be rude to some one, and is disappointed
   I--couldn't help it
   Interfere with people who had a trade and didn't understand it
   Lose their heads, and be so absurdly earnest
   Scoundrel, too weak to face the consequences of his sin





End of Project Gutenberg's At The Sign Of The Eagle, by Gilbert Parker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT THE SIGN OF THE EAGLE ***

***** This file should be named 6218.txt or 6218.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/6/2/1/6218/

Produced by David Widger


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.


Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
