Project Gutenberg's Quaint Gleanings from Ancient Poetry, by Edmund Goldsmid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Quaint Gleanings from Ancient Poetry

Author: Edmund Goldsmid

Posting Date: June 5, 2012 [EBook #6375]
Release Date: August, 2004
First Posted: December 2, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUAINT GLEANINGS--ANCIENT POETRY ***




Produced by Beth Constantine, David Starner, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










Quaint Gleanings From Ancient Poetry:


A COLLECTION OF CURIOUS POETICAL COMPOSITIONS
OF THE XVIth, XVIIth, AND XVIIIth CENTURIES.



EDITED From MSS. and Rare Printed Originals
BY EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S.




INTRODUCTION.



The following curious collection I have gathered together during
several years' reading in out-of-the-way corners. Manuscripts, in
public and private libraries; old books picked up on dusty bookstalls,
or carried away as prizes from the battlefield of the auction-room;
even pencillings on the inside of tattered bindings,--all have been
laid under contribution. I trust this medley, or _pot-pourri_, of
snatches of song, grave and gay, will prove as interesting to my
readers as they have been to myself. They claim attention on various
grounds: some are the works of well-known men, such as Anthony Munday
and Warren Hastings; some are bitter political squibs--such, for
instance, as the "Satyre against the Scots," page 47; some, again, are
exquisitely beautiful, as "The Dirge," page 53. A few have appeared in
different collections: but none of my readers, I will undertake to
say, have seen more than a half-dozen or so.

With these few words I beg to introduce Volume One of the "Collectanea
Adamantaea."

EDMUND GOLDSMID.

Edinburgh, _March 6th_, 1884.




CONTENTS.



I. BEAUTIES FORT

II. MY BONNY LASS, THINE EYE

III. ANTHONY MUNDAY'S POEM ON THE CAPTIVITY OF JOHN FOX

IV. CARE FOR THY SOUL

V. MEGLIORA SPERO

VI. A LETTER FROM THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH TO THE KING

VII. THE KING'S ANSWER

VIII. AN EPITAPH ON DUNDEE

IX. THE ROBBER ROBB'D

X. AH! THE SHEPHERD'S MOURNFUL FATE

XI. VERSES TO A FRIEND

XII. A PANYGYRICK UPON OATES

XIII. THE MIRACLE

XIV. THE PATRIOTS

XV. JUSTICE IN MASQUERADE

XVI. THE BRAWNY BISHOP'S LAMENT

XVII. THE POOR BLIND BOY

XVIII. THE INISKILLING REGIMENT

XIX. A BALLAD ON THE FLEET

XX. ON MR. FOX AND MR. HASTINGS

XXI. AN IMITATION OF HORACE, BK. II, ODE 16

XXII. EPITAPH ON DR. JOHNSON

XXIII. VERSES UPON THE ROAD

XXIV. SATYR ON THE SCOTS

XXV. THE MARSEILLAISE

XXVI. A DIRGE




BEAUTIES FORT.

FROM AN ANONYMOUS MS., LATELY IN POSSESSION OF
J. P. COLLIER, ESQ., F.S.A.



When raging Love, with fierce assault,
  Strikes at fair Beauties gate,
What army hath she to resist
  And keepe her court and state?

She calleth first on Chastitie
  To lende her help in time;
And Prudence no lesse summons shee
  To meet her foe so trim.

And female Courage she alwaye
  Doth bring unto the walle,
To blowe the trump in her dismaye,
  Fearing her fort may falle.

On force of wordes she much relies
  Her foe without to keepe,
And parleyeth with her two bright eyes
  When they her dyke would leape.

Yet natheless the more she strives,
  The lesse she keepes him out,
For she hath traitors in her camp
  That keepe her still in doubt.

The first and worst of these the Fleshe,
  Then womans Vanitie
That still is caughte within the meshe
  Of guilefull Flatterie.

These traitors ope the gate at length;
  And in, with sword in hande,
Came raging Love, and all her strength
  No longer can withstande.

Prudence and Chastitie both to
  Submit unto the foe;
And female Courage nought can doe
  But down her walls must goe.

She needes must yield her castle strong,
  And Love triumphs once more;
Its onely what the boy hath done
  A thousand times before.

None may resist his mightie power;
  And though a boy, and blinde,
He knows to chase a happie hour
  When maidens must be kinde.




MY BONNY LASS! THINE EYE.

By THOMAS LODGE, M.D.

[Footnote: The original of this poem not being within my reach at
present, I have inserted Professor Arber's modern version.]




My bonny lass! thine eye,
            So sly,
Hath made me sorrow so.
Thy crimson cheeks, my dear!
            So clear,
Have so much wrought my woe.

Thy pleasing smiles and grace,
            Thy face,
Have ravished so my sprites,
That life is grown to nought
            Through thought
Of love, which me affrights.

For fancy's flames of fire
            Aspire
Unto such furious power,
As but the tears I shed
            Make dead,
The brands would me devour.

I should consume to nought
            Through thought
Of thy fair shining eye,
Thy cheeks, thy pleasing smiles,
            The wiles
That forced my heart to die,

Thy grace, thy face, the part
            Where art
Stands gazing still to see
The wondrous gifts and power,
            Each hour,
That hath bewitched me.




ANTHONY MUNDAY'S POEM ON THE CAPTIVITY OF JOHN FOX.


Leeving at large all fables vainly us'd,
  all trifling toys that doe no truth import,
Lo, here how the end (at length), though long diffus'd,
  unfoldeth plaine a rare and true report,
To glad those minds who seek their countries wealth
  by proffer'd pains t'enlarge its happy health.

At Rome I was when Fox did there arrive;
  therefore I may sufficiently express
What gallant joy his deedes did there revive
  in the hearts of those which heard his valiantness.
And how the Pope did recompense his pains,
  and letters gave to move his greater gains.

But yet I know that many doe misdoubt
  that those his pains are fables, and untrue;
Not only I in this will bear him out,
  but divers more that did his Patents view,
And unto those so boldly I dare say
  that nought but truth John Fox cloth here bewray.

Besides, there's one was slave with him in thrall
  lately return'd into our native land;
This witness can this matter perfect all:
  what needeth more? for witness he may stand.
And thus I end, unfolding what I know;
  the other man more larger proof can show.
                    "_Honos alit Artes_"

The above lines by Anthony Munday are omitted by Hakluyt in his
reprint of the captivity of John Fox in his "Principal English
Voyages," vol. ii. p. 136, ed. 1598-1600. John Fox, of Woodbridge,
gunner of the _Three Half Moons_, was made prisoner by the Turks
in 1563. Escaped with 266 other Christians in 1577.




CARE FOR THY SOULE.


Care for thy soule, as thing of greatest pryce!
  Made to the ende to taste of power Divine,
Devoid of guilt, abhorryng sin and vice,
  Apt by God's grace to virtue to incline;
Care for it soe, as by thy retchless traine
It bee not brought to taste eternall paine!

Care for thy corpse (body), but chiefely for soules sake,
  Not of excess; sustainyng food is best
To vanquish pryde, but comely clothing take.
  Seeke after skille; deepe ignorance detest;
Care so, I say, the flesh to feede and cloth,
That thou harm not thy soule and bodie both.

Care for the world, to doe thy bodie right;
  Back not thy wytt to win by wicked wayes;
Seeke not t'oppress the weak by wrongfull might;
  To pay thy due, doe banish all delayes;
Care to dispend accordyng to thy store,
And, in like sort, bee mindfull of the pore.

Care for thy soule, as for thy chiefest staye,
  Care for thy bodie, for the soules avail;
Care for the world, for bodies helpe alwaye,
  Care yett but soe as virtue may prevail;
Care in such sort, that thou be sure of this,
Care keepe the not from heaven and heavenlie blisse.




MEGLIORA SPERO.

By Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford.


Faction, that ever dwells in Courte where witt excels,
    Hath sett defiance;
Fortune and Love have sworne that they were never borne
    Of one alliance.

Cupid, which doth aspire to be god of Desire,
    Swears he "gives lawes;
That where his arrows hit, somejoy, some sorrow it:
    Fortune no cause."

Fortune swears "weakest heartes," the bookes of Cupide's artes.
   "Turn'd with her wheel,
Senselesse themselves shal prove. Venture hath place in love.
    Aske them that feel!"

This discord it begot atheists, that honour not.
    Nature thought good
Fortune shoud ever dwel in Court where wits excel;
    Love keepe the wood.

Soe to the wood went I, with Love to live and dye;
    Fortunes forlorne.
Experience of my youth made mee thinke humble Truth
    In deserts borne.

My saint I keepe to mee, and Joan herself is free,
    Joan fair and true!
Shee that doth onely move passions of love with Love.
    Fortune! adieu!




A LETTER FROM THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH TO THE KING.


Disgrac'd, undone, forlorn, made Fortune's Sport,
Banish'd your Kingdom first, and then your Court;
Out of my Places turn'd, and out of Doors,
And made the meanest of your Sons of Whores;
The scene of Laughter, and the common chats
Of your salt Bitches, and your other Brats;
Forc'd to a private Life, to Whore and Drink,
On my past Grandeur and my Follies Think:
Would I had been the Brat of some mean Drab,
Whom Fear or Chance had caus'd to choak or stab,
Rather than be the Issue of a King,
And by him made so wretched, scorn'd a Thing.
How little cause has mankind to be proud
Of Noble Birth, the Idol of the Crowd!
Have I abroad in Battels Honour won
To be at home dishonourably undone?
Mark'd with a Star and Garter, and made fine
With all those gaudy Trifles once call'd mine,
Your Hobby-Horses [1] and your Joys of State,
And now become the Object of your Hate;
But, d------'ee, Sir, I'll be Legitimate.
I was your Darling, but against your Will,
And know that I will be the Peoples still;
And when you're dead, I and my Friends, the Rout,
Will with my Popish Uncle try a Bout,
And to my Troubles this one Comfort bring,
Next after you, by ------, I will be King.

[Footnote 1: At the age of sixteen he was made Master of the
Horse.]




THE KING'S ANSWER.


Ungrateful Boy! I will not call thee Son,
Thou hast thyself unhappily undone;
And thy Complaints serve but to show thee more,
How much thou hast enrag'd thy Father's Whore.
Resent it not, shake not thy addle Head,
And be no more by Clubs and Rascals led.
Have I made thee the Darling of my Joys,
The prettiest and the lustiest of my Boys?
Have I so oft sent thee with cost to France,
To take new Dresses up, and learn to dance?
Have I giv'n thee a Ribbon and a Star,
And sent thee like a Meteor to the War?
Have I done all that Royal Dad could do,
And do you threaten now to be untrue?
But say I did with thy fond Mother sport,
To the same kindness others had resort;
'Twas my good Nature, and I meant her Fame,
To shelter thee under my Royal Name.
Alas! I never got one Brat alone,
My Mistresses all are by each Fop well known,
And I still willing all their Brats to own.
I made thee once,'tis true, the Post of Grace,
And stuck upon thee every mighty Place,
Each glitt'ring Office, till thy heavy Brow
Grew dull with Honour, and my Pow'r low.
I spangled thee with Favours, hung thy Nose
With Rings of Gold and Pearl, till all grew Foes
By secret Envy at thy growing State:
I lost my safety when I made thee Great.
There's not the least Injustice to you shewn;
You must be ruin'd to secure my Throne.
Office is but a fickle Grace, the Badge
Bestow'd by fits, and snatch'd away in Rage;
And sure that Livery which I give my Slaves
I may take from 'em when my Portsmouth raves.
Thou art a Creature of my own Creation;
Then swallow this without Capitulation.
If you with feigned Wrongs still keep a Clutter,
And make the People for your Sake to mutter,
For my own Comfort, but your Trouble, know,
G------fish, I'll send you to the Shades below.




AN EPITAPH ON DUNDEE.

ENGLISH'D BY MR. DRYDEN.


O Last and Bests of Scots! Who didst maintain
Thy Country's Freedom from a Foreign Reign,
New People fill the Land now thou art gone,
New Gods the Temples, and new Kings the Throne.
Scotland and thou did each in other live,
Thou wouldst not her, nor could she thee, survive.
Farewell! who living didst support the State,
And couldst not fall but with thy Country's Fate.




THE ROBBER ROBB'D.


I.

A certain Priest had hoarded up
  A mass of secret Gold.
And where he might bestow it safe
  He knew not to be bold.

II.

At last it came into his Thought
  To lock it in a Chest
Within the Chancel; and he wrote
  Thereon, "_Hic Deus est_."

III.

A merry Grig, whose greedy Mind
  Did long for such a Prey,
Respecting not the Sacred Words
  That on the Casket lay,

IV.

Took out the Gold, and blotting out
  The Priest's Inscript thereon,
Wrote, "_Resurrexit, non est hic_":
  "Your God is rose and gone."




AH! THE SHEPHERD'S MOURNFUL FATE!


Ah! the shepherd's mournful fate!
  When doom'd to love, and doom'd to languish,
To bear the scornful fair one's hate,
  Nor dare disclose his anguish.
Yet eager looks, and dying sighs,
  My secret soul discover,
While rapture trembling thro' my eyes
  Reveals how much I love her.
The tender glance; the redd'ning cheek,
  O'erspread with rising blushes,
A thousand various ways they speak
  A thousand various wishes.
For, oh! that form so heavenly fair,
  Those languid eyes so sweetly smiling,
That artless blush, and modest air,
  So artfully beguiling! [2]
Thy every look and every grace
  So charms whene'er I view thee,
Till death o'ertake me in the chase
  Still will my hopes pursue thee;
Then when my tedious hours are past
  Be this last blessing given,
Low at thy feet to breathe my last,
  And die in sight of heaven.

[Footnote 2: "_Ars celare artem_."]




SOME VERSES TO A FRIEND WHO TWICE VENTURED ON MARRIAGE.

BY THOMAS BROWN.


The Husband's the Pilot, the Wife is the Ocean,
He always in danger, she always in motion;
And he that in Wedlock twice hazards his Carcase
Twice ventures the Drowning, and, Faith, that's a hard case.
Even at our Weapons the Females defeat us,
And Death, only Death, can sign our _Quietus_.
Not to tell you sad stories of Liberty lost,
Our Mirth is all pall'd, and our Measures all crost;
That Pagan Confinement, that damnable Station,
Sutes no other States or Degrees in the Nation.
The _Levite_ it keeps from Parochial Duty,
For who can at once mind Religion and Beauty?
The Rich it alarms with Expences and Trouble,
And a poor Beast, you know, can scarce carry double.
'Twas invented, they tell you, to keep us from falling;
Oh the Virtues and Graces of shrill Caterwauling!
How it palls in your Gain; but, pray, how do you know, Sir,
How often your Neighbour breaks in your Enclosure?
For this is the principal Comforts of Marriage,
You must eat tho' a hundred have spit in your Porridg.
If at night you're inactive, or fail in performing,
Enter Thunder and Lightning, and Blood-shed, next Morning;
Lust's the Bone of your Shanks, O dear Mr. Horner:
This comes of your sinning with Crape in a Corner.
Then to make up the Breach all your Strength you must rally,
And labour and sweat like a Slave in a Gaily;
And still you must charge--O blessed Condition!--
Tho' you know, to your cost, you've no more Ammunition:
Till at last the poor fool of a mortified man
Is unable to make a poor Flash in the Pan.
Fire, Flood, and Female, begin with a letter,
But for all the World's not a Farthing the better.
Your Flood is soon gone, and your Fire you must humble,
If into Flames store of Water you tumble;
But to cure the damn'd Lust of your Wife's Titilation,
You may use all the Engines and Pumps in the Nation,
As well you may p---- out the last Conflagration.
And thus I have sent you my Thoughts of the matter;
You may judge as you please; I scorn for to flatter:
I could say much more, but here ends the Chapter.




A PANYGYRICK UPON OATES.


Of all the Grain our Nation yields
In Orchard, Gardens, or in Fields,
There is a grain which, tho' 'tis common,
Its Worth till now was known to no Man.
Not _Ceres_ Sickle e're did crop
A Grain with Ears of greater hope:
And yet this Grain (as all must own)
To Grooms and Hostlers well is known,
And often has without disdain
In musty Barn and Manger lain,
As if it had been only good
To be for Birds and Beasts the Food.
But now by new-inspired Force,
It keeps alive both Man and Horse.
Then speak, my Muse, for now I guess
E'en what it is thou wouldst express:
It is not Barley, Rye, nor Wheat,
That can pretend to do the Feat:
'Tis _Oates_, bare _Oates_, that is become
The Health of _England_, Bane of _Rome_,
And Wonder of all Christendom.
And therefore _Oates_ has well deserv'd
To be from musty Barn prefer'd,
And now in Royal Court preserv'd,
That like _Hesperian_ Fruit, _Oates_ may
Be watch'd and guarded Night and Day,
Which is but just retaliation
For having guarded a whole Nation.
Hence e'ery lofty Plant that stands
'Twixt _Berwick_ Walls and _Dover_ Sands,
The Oak itself (which well we stile
The Pride and Glory of our Isle),
Must strike and wave its lofty Head.
And now salute an Oaten Reed,
For surely Oates deserves to be
Exalted far 'bove any Tree.
The Agyptians once (tho' it seems odd)
Did worship Onions for their God,
And poor Peelgarlick was with them
Esteem'd beyond the richest Gem.
What would they then have done, think ye,
Had they but had such _Oates_ as we,
_Oates_ of such known Divinity?
Since then such good by _Oates_ we find,
Let _Oates_ at least be now enshrin'd;
Or in some sacred Press enclos'd,
Be only kept to be expos'd;
And all fond Relicks else shall be
Deem'd Objects of Idolatry.
Popelings may tell us how they saw
Their _Garnet_ pictur'd on a Straw.
'Twas a great Miracle, we know,
To see him drawn in little so:
But on an _Oaten_ stalk there is
A greater Miracle than this;
A Visage which, with comly Grace,
Did twenty _Garnets_ now outface:
Nay, to the Wonder to add more,
Declare unheard-of things before;
And thousand Myst'ries does unfold,
As plain as Oracles of old,
By which we steer Affairs of State,
And stave off _Britain's_ sullen Fate.
Let's then, in Honour of the Name
Of _OATES_, enact some Solemn Game,
Where Oaten Pipe shall us inspire
Beyond the charms of _Orpheus_ Lyre;
Stone, Stocks, and e'ery sensless thing
To _Oates_ shall dance, to _Oates_ shall sing,
Whilst Woods amaz'd to t'Ecchoes ring.
And that this Hero's Name may not,
When they are rotten, be forgot,
We'll hang Atchievments o'er their Dust,
A Debt we owe to Merits just
So if Deserts of _Oates_ we prize,
Let _Oates_ still hang before our Eyes,
Thereby to raise our contemplation,
_Oates_ being to this happy Nation
A Mystick Emblem of Salvation.




THE MIRACLE.

TO THE TUNE OF "O YOUTH, THOU HADST BETTER BEEN STARVED AT NURSE."


I.

You Catholick States-men and Church-men, rejoyce,
And praise Heaven's Goodness with Heart and with Voice;
None greater on Earth or in Heaven than She,
Some say she's as good as the best of the Three.
    Her miracles bold
    Were famous of old,
But a Braver than this was never yet told;
'Tis pity that every good Catholick living
Had not heard on't before the last Day of Thanksgiving.

II.

In _Lombardy-Land_ great _Modena's_ Duchess [3]
Was snatched from her Empire by Death's cruel clutches;
When to Heaven she came (for thither she went)
Each Angel received her with Joy and Content.
    On her knees she fell down,
    Before the bright Throne,
And begged that God's Mother would grant her one Boon:
Give _England_ a Son (at this Critical Point)
To put little _Orange's_ Nose out of Joynt.

III.

As soon as our Lady had heard her Petition,
To _Gabriel_, the Angel, she strait gave Commission;
She pluck'd off her Smock from her _Shoulders Divine_,
And charg'd him to hasten to _England's_ fair Queen.
    "Go to the Royal Dame,
    To give her the same,
And bid her for ever to praise my Great Name,
For I, in her favour, will work such a Wonder,
Shall keep the most Insolent Hereticks under.

IV.

"Tell _James_ (my best son) his part of the matter
Must be with this only to cover my daughter;
Let him put it upon her with's own Royal Hand,
Then let him go travel to visit the Land;
    And the Spirit of Love
    Shall come from above,
Though not as before, in form of a Dove;
Yet down He shall come in some likeness or other
(Perhaps like Count _Dada_), and make her a Mother."

V.

The Message with Hearts full of Faith was receiv'd,
And the next news we heard was _Q. M._ conceiv'd;
You great ones Converted, poor cheated Dissenters,
Grave Judges, Lords, Bishops, and Commons Consenters,
    You Commissioners all
    Ecclesiastical,
From _M_...[4] the Dutiful to _C_...[5] the Tall,
Pray Heav'n to strengthen Her Majesties Placket,
For if this Trick fail, beware of your Jacket.

[Footnote 3: Maria Laura d'Este.]

[Footnote 4: John, Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Chamberlain of the
Household.]

[Footnote 5: William, Earl of Craven.]




THE PATRIOTS.

WRIT ABOUT THE YEAR 1700.


I.

Ye worthy Patriots, go on
  To heal the Nation's Sores,
Find all Men's Faults out but your own,
Begin good Laws, but finish none,
  And then shut up your Doors.

II.

Fail not our Freedom to secure,
  And all our Friends disband,
And send those Men to t'other Shore
Who were such Fools as to come o'er
  To help this grateful Land.

III.

And may the next that hears us pray,
  And in Distress relieve us,
Go home like those without their Pay,
And with Contempt be sent away
  For having once believ'd us.

IV.

And if the _French_ should e'er attempt
  This Nation to invade,
May they be damn'd that list again,
But lead the fam'd Militia on,
  To be like us betray'd.

V.

As for the Crown you have bestow'd,
  With all its Limitations,
The meanest Prince in _Christendom_
Would never stir a Mile from home
  To govern three such Nations.

VI.

The King himself, whom once you call'd
  Your Saviour in Distress,
You in his first Request deny'd,
And then his Royal Patience try'd
  With a canting sham Address.

VII.

Ye are the Men that to be chose
  Wou'd be at no Expences,
Who love no Friends, nor fear no Foes,
Have ways and means that no Man knows
  To mortify your Senses.

VIII.

Ye are the Men that can condemn
  By Laws made _ex post facto_,
Who can make Knaves of honest Men,
And married Women turn again
  To be Virgo and Intacta.

IX.

Go on to purify the Court,
  And damn the Men of Places
Till decently you send them home,
And get your selves put in their room,
  And then you'll change your Faces.

X.

Go on for to establish Trade,
  And mend our Navigation,
Let India invade,
And borrow on Funds will ne'er be paid,
  And Bankrupt all the Nation.

XI.

'Tis you that calculate our Gold,
  And with a senseless Tone,
Vote that you never understood,
That we might take them if we wou'd
  Or let them all alone.

XII.

Your Missives you send round about
  With Mr. _Speaker's_ Letter,
To fetch Folks in, and find Folks out,
Which Fools believe without dispute,
  Because they know no better.

XIII.

With borrow'd Ships, and hir'd Men,
  The _Irish_ to reduce,
Who will be paid the Lord knows when;
'Tis hop'd whene'er you want again,
  You'll think of that Abuse.

XIV.

Ye laid sham Taxes on our Malt,
  On Salt, on Glass, on Leather,
To wheedle Coxcombs in to lend;
And like true Cheats, you dropt that Fund,
  And sunk them all altogether.

XV.

And now y'are piously enclin'd
  The Needy to employ;
You'd better much your time bestow
To pay neglected Debts you owe,
  Which makes them multiply.

XVI.

Against Prophaneness you declar'd,
  And then the Bill rejected;
And when the Arguments appear'd,
They were the worst that e'er were heard,
  And best that we expected.

XVII.

'Twas voted once that for the Sin
  Of Whoring Men should die all;
But then it was wisely thought again.
The House would quickly grow so thin,
  They durst not stand the Tryal.

XVIII.

King _Charles_ the Second knew your aim,
  And Places gave, and Pensions;
And had King _William's_ Mony flown,
His Majesty would soon have known
  Your Consciences Dimensions.

XIX.

But he has wisely given you up
  To work your own desires,
And laying Arguments aside,
As things that have in vain been try'd,
  To Fasting calls, and Prayers.

CHORUS--
  Your Hours are choicely employ'd,
   Your Petitions lie all on the Table,
     With Funds Insufficient,
     And Taxes Deficient,
   And Deponents innumerable.
  For shame leave this wicked Employment,
   Reform both your Manners and Lives;
     You were never sent out
     To make such a Rout,
   Go home, and look after your W----s.




JUSTICE IN MASQUERADE; OR, SCROGGS UPON SCROGGS.


A Butcher's Son's Judge Capital
Poor Protestants for to enthral,
        And England to enslave, Sirs;
Lose both our Laws and Lives we must
When to do Justice we entrust
        So known an arrant Knave, Sirs.

Some hungry Priests he did once fell,
With mighty Strokes sent them to Hell,
        Sent presently away, Sirs;
Would you know why? The Reason's plain
They had no _English_ nor _French_ coin
        To make a longer stay, Sirs.

The Pope to Purgatory sends
Who neither Money have nor Friends,
        In this he's not alone, Sirs;
For our Judge to Mercy's no inclin'd,
'Less Gold change Conscience and his Mind,
        You are infallibly gone, Sirs.

His Father once exempted was
Out of all Juries [6]; why? because
        He was a Man of Blood, Sirs;
And why the Butcherly Son (forsooth)
Shou'd now be Jury and Judge both
        Cannot be understood, Sirs.

The good Old Man with Knife and Knocks
Made harmless Sheep and stubborn Ox
        Stoop to him in his Fury;
But the brib'd Son, like greasie Oaph,
Kneels down and worships Golden Calf,
        And so do's all the Jury.

Better thou'dst been at Father's Trade,
An honest Livelihood to have made,
        In lamp'ring Bulls with Collars,
Than to thy Country prove unjust,
First sell, and then betray, thy Trust,
        For so many hard Rix-Dollars.

Priest and Physician thou didst save
From Gallows, Fire, and from the Grave,
        For which we can't endure thee;
The one can ne'er absolve thy Sins,
And th'other (tho' he now begins)
        Of Knav'ry ne'er can cure thee.

But lest we all shou'd end his Life,
And with a keen-whet Chopping-Knife
        In a Thousand pieces cleave him,
Let the Parliament first him undertake,
They'll make the Rascal stink at stake,
        And so, like a Knave, let's leave him.

[Footnote 6: By an old law, butchers and surgeons were unable to serve
on juries.]




THE BRAWNY BISHOP'S COMPLAINT.

TO THE TUNE OF "PACKINGTON'S POUND."


I.

When B----t [7] perceiv'd the beautiful Dames,
Who flock'd to the Chapel of Holy St. _James_,
On their Lovers the kindest Looks did bestow,
And smil'd not on him while he bellow'd below,
    To the Princess he went
    With Pious intent
This dangerous Ill in the Church to prevent:
"O Madam!" quoth he, "our Religion is lost
If the Ladies thus ogle the Knights of the Toast.

II.

"Your Highness observes how I labour and sweat
Their Affections to raise, and new Flames to beget;
And sure when I preach all the World, will agree
That their Ears and their Eyes should be pointed on me:
    But now I can't find
    One Beauty so kind
As my Parts to regard, or my Presence to mind;
Nay, I scarce have a sight of any one Face
But those of old _Oxford_ and ugly Arglas.

III.

"These sorrowful Matrons, with Hearts full of Truth,
Repent for the manifold Sins of their Youth:
The rest with their Tattle my Harmony spoil;
And Bur--ton, An--sey, K--gston, and B--le [8]
    Their Minds entertain
    With thoughts so profane
'Tis a mercy to find that at Church they contain;
Ev'n Hen--ham's [9] Shapes their weak Fancies intice,
And rather than me they will ogle the Vice. [10]

IV.

"These Practices, Madam, my Preaching disgrace;
Shall Laymen enjoy the just Rights of my Place?
Then all may lament my Condition for hard,
To thresh in the Pulpit without a Reward.
    Then pray condescend
    Such Disorders to end,
And from their ripe Vineyards such Labourers send;
Or build up the Seats, that the Beauties may see
The Face of no brawny Pretender but me."

V.

The Princess, by rude Importunities press'd,
Tho' she laugh'd at his Reasons, allow'd his request;
And now _Britain's_ Nymphs in a Protestant Reign
Are locked up at Pray'rs like the Virgins in Spain,
    And all are undone
    As sure as a Gun:
Whenever a Woman is kept like a Nun;
If any kind Man from Bondage will save her,
The Lass in Gratitude grants him the Favour.

[Footnote 7: Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, who in 1674 was
preacher at the Rolls Chapel.]

[Footnote 8: Burlington, Anglesey, Kingston, and Boyle.]

[Footnote 9: Heningham.]

[Footnote 10: The Vice-Chamberlain.]




THE POOR BLIND BOY.

BY COLLY GIBBER, 1749.


Oh, say! what is that thing call'd _light_,
  Which I can ne'er enjoy?
What is the blessing of the sight?
  Oh, tell your poor blind boy.

You talk of wondrous things you see;
  You say the sun shines bright;
I feel his warmth, but how can he
  E'er make it day or night?

My day or night myself I make,
  Whene'er I sleep or play;
And could I always keep awake,
  It would be always day.

With heavy sighs, I often hear
  You mourn my hopeless woe;
But sure with patience I may bear
  A loss I do not know.

Then let not what I cannot have
  My peace of mind destroy;
While thus I sing, I am a king,
  Although a poor blind boy.




THE INISKILLING REGIMENT.


I.

I will sing in the Praise, if you'll lend but an Ear,
Of the first Royal Regiment, but don't think I jeer
If I vow and protest they are as brave Men and Willing,
As ever old _Rome_ bred, or new _Iniskilling_.

II.

Oh, had you but seen them March with that _Decorum_
That no _Roman_ Triumph could e're go before 'em,
Some smoking, some whistling, all meaning no harm,
Like _Yorkshire_ Attornies coming up to a Term,

III.

On Bobtails, on _Longtails_, on Trotters, on Pacers,
On Pads, Hawkers, Hunters, on Higlers, on Racers,
You'd ha' swore Knight and Squires, Prigs, Cuckolds, and Pandors.
Appear'd all like so many great _Alexanders_,

IV.

Whose Warriers who thorow all Dangers durst go.
Most bravely despising Blood, Battle, and Foe,
Were mounted on Steeds the last Lord Mayor's Day,
From _Turky, Spain, Barbary_, Coach, Cart, and Dray.

V.

'Twas that very day their high Prowess was shown,
In guarding the King thro' the Fire-works o' th' Town;
Tho' Sparks were unhors'd and their lac'd Coats were spoil'd,
They dreaded no Squibs of Men, Women, or Child.

VI.

The Cornet whose nose, though it spoke him no _Roman_,
Was mounted that day on a Horse that feared no man,
No Wounds, for all o're his Trappings so sumptuous
He had ty'd Squibs and Crackers; 'twas mighty presumptuous.

VII.

For note his Design; faith, 'tis worth your admiring:
'Twas to let the Queen se how his Horse could stand firing,
Not wisely consid'ring her Majesty's marry'd,
And he had been hang'd if the Queen had miscarry'd.

VIII.

All Hearts true as Steel, but of all brave Fellows
Th'Attorney for my money who was so zealous,
He went for the Lease of his own House from Home,
To make a new covering for the Troop's Kettle drum.

IX.

The Lieutenant being thrown by his Jennet,
His Son in Law fancying some Treachery in it,
Gave the Oaths to the Horse, which the Beast took, they say,
But swore by the Lord they went down like chopt hay.

X.

He the Nag of an _Irish_ Papist did buy,
So doubting his Courage and his Loyalty,
He taught him to eat with his Oats Gunpowdero,
And prance to the Tune of Lilly-bolero. [11]

XI.
The Tub-preaching Saint was so furious a Blade,
In Jack-boots both Day and Night preacht, slept, and pray'd;
To call them to prayers he need no Saint's Bell,
For gingling his Spurs chim'd them all in as well.

XII.

A noble stout Scrivener that now shall be nameless,
That in Day of Battle he might be found blameless,
A War-horse of Wood from _Duck Carver_ buys,
To learn with more safety the Horse Exercise.

XIII.

With one eye on's Honour, the other on's Gain,
He fixes a Desk on _Bucephalus_ Main,
That so by that means he his Prancer bestriding,
Might practise at once both his Writing and Riding.

XIV.

But, oh, the sad news which their Joy now confounds,
To _Ireland_, their own, like the last Trumpet sounds;
Lord! Lord! how this sets them a Waiting Petitions,
And thinking of nothing but Terms and Conditions.

XV.

Oh, who will March for me? speak any that dare,
A Horse and an Hundred Pounds for him, that's fair;
Dear Courtiers, excuse me from Teagland and Slaughter,
And take which you please, _Sir_, my Wife or my Daughter."

XVI.
Some feign'd themselves lame, some feign'd themselves clapt,
At last finding all themselves by themselves trapt,
The King most unanimously they addrest,
And told him the Truth, 'twas all but a Jest.

XVII.
"A Jest," quoth the King, and with that the King smil'd,
"Come, it ne're shall be said such a Jest shall be spoil'd;
Therefore I dismiss you. in Peace all depart,
For it was more your Goodness than my Desert."

XVIII.

Thus happily freed from the dreadful Vexation
Of being Defenders of this, or that Nation,
They kist Royal Fist, and were drunk all for Joy,
And broke all their swords, and cry'd _Vive le Roy_.

[Footnote 11: The refrain of a celebrated political song.]




A BALLAD ON THE FLEET.


I.

A mighty great Fleet--the like was ne'er seen
Since the Reign of K. _William_ and _Mary_ the Q.--
Design'd the Destruction of _France_, to have been,
    _Which nobody can deny_, etc.

II.

The Fleet was composed of _English_ and _Dutch_;
For Men and for Guns there was never seen such,
Nor so little done when expected so much,
    _Which_, etc.

III.

One hundred Ships which we Capital call,
With Frigots and Tenders, and Yatchts that were small,
Went out, and did little or nothing at all,
    _Which_, etc.

IV.

260,500 and six Lusty Men,
Had they chanc'd to have met with the _French_ Fleet, oh, then,
As they beat 'em last year, so they'd beat 'em again,
    _Which_, etc.

V.

Six thousand great Guns and seventy-eight more,
As good and as great as ever did roar;
It had been the same thing had they all been ashore,
    _Which_, etc.

VI.

But T---- [12] now must command them no more;
We try'd of what Mettle he was made of before;
It's safer for him on the Land for to whore,
    _Which_, etc.

VII.

For a Bullet perhaps from the loud Cannons Breech,
Which makes no distinction betwixt poor and rich,
Instead of his Dog might have taken his Bitch,
    _Which_, etc.


VIII.

But R---- the C---- C---- R---- is chose
His fine self and his Fleet to the Sea to expose,
But he'll have a care how he meets with his Foes,
    _Which_, etc.

IX.

He had Sea-Colonels of the Nature of Otter,
Which either might serve by Land or by Water,
But of what they have done we have heard no great matter,
    _Which_, etc.

X.

In the month of _May_ last they sail'd on the Main,
And now in _September_ they come back again
With the loss of some ships, but in Battle none slain,
    _Which_, etc.

[Footnote 12: Probably George, Viscount Torrington, First Lord of the
Admiralty in 1727.]




ON SEEING MR. FOX AND MR. HASTINGS AT CHELTENHAM.


  "En redit Hastingus, pocatis regibus Indi,
  Anglorum et posito nomine, et imperio,
  Ecce silet vulpes, annosaque fabula Burki,
  Faucibus haret, eheu, Dic, age, dic Sheridan."

From Eastern climes, lo, Hastings! late return'd,
His struggles ended, and his fame well earn'd,
Illustrious Stateman! [13] to a distant age
Thy name shall live and grace th'historic page;
There licens'd falsehoods [14] shall no more prevail,
Nor Dodsley publish [15] Edmund's annual tale.
When France, exulting, deem'd our ruin near,
And Hyder's progress struck each Chief with fear;
When hostile nations press'd in league combin'd,
Collected, firm, and dauntless was thy mind;
Inspir'd by Hastings, Coote [16]: the seasons brav'd,
Embark'd his succours, and a kingdom sav'd.
Goddard [17] at his command our standard bore
Through lands to England's sons unknown before;
While Popham's victories rais'd our country's fame
And fix'd in realms remote the British name.
The sued-for peace [18] to Gualior's fall is due.
And Gualior's capture long was Hastings' view.
History shall tell how clos'd the scene of blood,
When to a world oppos'd Britannia stood;
No conquest Gallia claims on India's coast,
No splendid triumphs can the Belgian boast,
For millions wasted, [19] and a navy lost.
The keen Maratta and the fierce Mysore
Their league dissolve, and give the contest o'er;
And peace restor'd, e'en party owns, tho' late, [20]
That Hastings' firmness has preserv'd the State.
Succeeding ages this great truth shall know,
A truth recorded by a generous foe, [21]
That England's genius, in a luckless hour
For Gallic schemes, gave Hastings Sov'reign pow'r.

[Footnote 13: Pitt, who moved the address upon the peace in Lord
Shelburne's administration, declared, in the course of his speech,
that he had no fears for India while so illustrious a stateman as Mr.
Hastings directed our councils, and so great a general as Sir Eyre
Coote commanded our armies. This declaration was the more honourable
for Mr. Hastings because at that time the absurd prejudices of the
Rockingham party had misled half the Nation.]

[Footnote 14: It can be remembered with what diligence copies of the
reports of the Select Committee were circulated under the sanction of
the Ministry, and how many false and abusive libels were given away
through the kingdom, tending to depreciate the character of Mr.
Hastings, previous to Mr. Fox's bringing in his India Bill.]

[Footnote 15: Mr. Burke published a speech almost every year after he
came into notice.]

[Footnote 16: The preservation of the British empire in India depended
upon Sir Eyre Coote's safe arrival at Madras with money and troops at
the most dangerous season of the year, when merchant ships seldom
venture upon the coast.]

[Footnote 17: General Goddard marched from Corah to Surat, across the
continent of Indostan, and after the conclusion of the peace the same
army returned to Bengal under the command of Colonel Charles Morgan,
through countries which we had formerly little knowledge of. Colonel
Pearce marched at the head of five regiments of Bengal Sepoys from
Calcutta to reinforce Sir Eyre Coote's army at Madras. This brave
detachment was distinguished in every action; on the attack of the
French lines at Cuddalore, one of the regiments was opposed to a
French European regiment, and much of the success of that day is
attributed to the spirited exertions of the Bengal detachment. Colonel
Pearce, on the conclusion of the peace with Tippoo, marched this
detachment back to Calcutta, where it was disbanded in the month of
January.]

[Footnote 18: The separate peace with Madagee Scindia was entirely
owing to the capture of Gwalior and to the subsequent operations of a
detachment formed by Hastings for the express purpose of drawing
Scindia from Guzzerat to the defence of his own dominions, and as a
certain means of effecting a general peace.]

[Footnote 19: The war in India cost France at least seven millions
sterling, and at the close of it we were in possession of all the
French and Dutch settlements on the continent of India, and were
besieging their forces in Cuddalore when intelligence of the peace in
Europe was received at Madras.]

[Footnote 20: The Directors were divided at one period in their
opinion of Hastings; and Fox and Burke invariably laid great stress
upon the circumstance that thirteen directors were of opinion he ought
to be recalled in 1783, though ten of the same body, and 428
proprietors, most strenuously supported him. Many of the thirteen who
voted his recall in 1783 were in the Direction when he received a
unanimous vote of thanks for his long, faithful, and important
services.]

[Footnote 21: Monsieur Law, governor of Pondicherry, in a memoir
addressed to the French Minister, says, "In an evil hour for France
the English East India Company appointed Mr. Hastings governor of
Bengal." And Monsieur Suffrien, in a letter to Hastings, relative to
his treatment of English prisoners, says that he wishes to explain the
motives of his conduct to one "of whom all the world speaks well,"-and
surely a compliment of this kind was never paid with more justice to
any individual than to Warren Hastings. Throughout India and Europe,
the character of no man was more generally known or more universally
respected.]



AN IMITATION OF HORACE

BOOK II., ODE 16.

WRITTEN BY WARREN HASTINGS
ON HIS PASSAGE FROM BENGAL TO ENGLAND IN 1785.
ADDRESSED TO JOHN SHORE, ESQ.


For ease the harass'd seaman prays,
When Equinoctial tempests raise
  The Cape's surrounding wave;
When hanging o'er the reef, he hears
The cracking mast, and sees or fears,
  Beneath, his wat'ry grave.

For ease the slow _Maratta_ spoils,
And hardier _Sic_ erratic toils,
  While both their ease forego;
For ease, which neither gold can buy,
Nor robes, nor gems, which oft belie,
  The cover'd heart bestow;

For neither gold nor gems combin'd
Can heal the soul, or suffering mind;
  Lo! where their owner lies,
Perch'd on his couch Distemper breathes,
And Care like smoke, in turbid wreathes,
  Round the gay cieling flies.

He who enjoys, nor covets more,
The lands his father held before,
  Is of true bliss possess'd:
Let but his mind unfetter'd tread
Far as the paths of knowledge lead,
  And wise as well as blest.

No fears his peace of mind annoy
Lest printed lies his fame destroy,
  Which labour'd years have won,
Nor pack'd committees break his rest,
Nor avarice sends him forth in quest
  Of climes beneath the sun.

Short is our span; then why engage
In schemes, for which man's transient age
  Was ne'er by Fate designed?
Why slight the gifts of Nature's hand?
What wanderer from his native land
  E'er left himself behind?

The restless thought, and wayward will,
And discontent attend him still,
  Nor quit him while he lives;
At sea care follows in the wind,
At land it mounts the pad behind,
  Or with the postboy drives.

He would happy live to-day
Must laugh the present ills away,
  Nor think of woes to come,
For come they will or soon or late,
Since mix'd at best is man's estate,
  By Heaven's eternal doom.

To ripen'd age Clive liv'd renown'd,
With lacks enrich'd, with honours crown'd,
  His valour's well-earn'd meed;
Too long, alas! he lived to hate
His envied lot, and died [22] too late,
  From life's oppression freed.

An early death was Elliott's [23] doom;
I saw his opening virtues bloom,
  And manly sense unfold,
Too soon to fade! I bade the stone
Record his name 'midst Hordes unknown,
  Unknowing what it told.

To thee, perhaps, the fates may give--
I wish they may--in health to live,
  Herds, flocks, and fruitful fields,
Thy vacant hours in mirth to shine;
With these, the muse already thine
  Her present bounties yields.

For me, O Shore! I only claim
To merit, not to seek for fame,
  The good and just to please,
A state above the fear of want,
Domestic love, Heaven's choicest grant,
  Health, leisure, peace, and ease.

[Footnote 22: Lord Clive committed suicide 1774.]

[Footnote 23: Mr. Elliott died in October, 1778, on his way to
Nangpore, the capital of Moodagees Boofla's dominions, being deputed
on an embassy to that prince by the Governor-General and Council; a
monument was erected to his memory on the spot where he was buried,
and the Marattas have since built a town there, called Elliott
Gunge, or Elliott's Town.]




EPITAPH ON DR. JOHNSON.


Here lies poor Johnson. Reader, have a care,
Tread lightly, lest you rouse a sleeping bear:
Religious, moral, generous, and humane
He was, but self-sufficient, rude, and vain;
Ill-bred and overbearing in dispute,
A scholar and a Christian--yet a brute.
Would you know all his wisdom and his folly,
His actions, sayings, mirth, and melancholy?
Boswell and Thrale, retailers of his wit,
Will tell you how he wrote, and talked, and cough'd, and spit.




VERSES UPON THE ROAD.
FACIT INDIGNATIO.

AN UNPUBLISHED POEM, BY DAVID GARRICK,
TO LORD JOHN CAVENDISH.


Whilst all with sighs their way pursue
  From Chatsworth's blest abode,
My mind still fires, my Lord, at you,
  And thus bursts out in ode.

Forgive my phrenzy, good Lord John,
  For passion's my Apollo:
Sweet Hebe says, when sense is gone,
  That nonsense needs must follow.

Like Indian knife, or Highland sword,
  Your words have hewn and hack'd me;
Whilst Quin, a rebel to his lord,
  Like his own Falstaff back'd me.

In vain I bounce, and fume, and fret,
  Swear Shakespeare is divine;
Fitzherbert [24] can a while forget
  His pains to laugh at mine.

Lord Frederick, George, and eke his Grace,
  My honest zeal deride;
Nay, Hubert's melancholy face
  Smirks on your Lordship's side.

With passion, zeal, and punch misled,
  Why goad me on to strife?
Why send me to a restless bed
  And disappointed wife?

This my reward! and this from you!
  Is't thus you Bowman [25] treat,
Who eats more toads than _you know who_
  Each night did strawberries eat?

Did I not mount the dun-drawn chaise,
  And sweat for many a mile?
And gave his Grace's skill much praise,
  _Grinning a ghastly smile!_

Did I not elsewhere risk my bones,
  My Lord-Duke's freaks took pride in?
Did I not trot down hills of Stones,
  And call it pleasant riding?

Did I not all your feats proclaim,
  Nor once from duty shrink?
In flattery I sunk my fame,
  A Bowman e'en in drink.

Did I not oft my conscience force,
  Against its dictates swear?
Have I not prais'd Lord Georg's horse?
  Nay, e'en your Lordship's mare?

Did I not oft, in rain and wind,
  O'er hills, thro' vallies roam,
When wiser folk would lag behind,
  And Spaniels staid at home?

Have I not with your natives fed,
  The worst of all my labours;
And ventur'd both my ears and head
  Amongst your scalping neighbours?

Not Quin's more blest with Calipee,
  Fitzherbert in his puns,
Lord John in contradicting me,
  Lord Frederick with his nuns,

Than I am blest in Shakespear's muse!
  Each drop within my standish,
Each drop of blood for him I'll lose,
  As firm as any Ca'ndish.

As Whig you gain the world's applause,
  For once a Tory shine,
A Tory once in Shakespeare's cause,
  And feel his right divine!

Attack my wife, my patent tear,
  Do deeds without a name!
Burn, kill, or ravish, Lord! but spare,
  Oh, spare my Shakespeare's fame!

Did not Dean Barker [26] wisely preach,
  Opinion may be sin?
Did not his sermon wisely teach
  To cleanse ourselves within?

From infidelity awake!
  Oh, melt your heart of stone;
Conceal your errors for my sake,
  Or mend them for your own.

[Footnote 24: William Fitzherbert, Esq., of Tissington, M.P. for
Derby.]

[Footnote 25: The name of a character in "Lethe."]

[Footnote 26: The Rev. William Barker, M.A., Dean of Raphoi He died
about 1777.]




SATYR ON THE SCOTS.

BY MR. CLEVELAND.


Come, keen _Iambicks_, with your Badgers' Feet,
And Badger-like bite till your Teeth do meet;
Help ye, Tart Satyrists, to imp my Rage,
With all the Scorpions that should whip this Age.
But that there's Charm in Verse, I would not quote
The Name of Scot without an Antidote,
Unless my Head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be Poison too.
Were I a drowzy Judge, whose dismal Note
Disgorges Halters, as a Juggler's Throat
Does Ribbons; could I in Sir _Empyrick's_ Tone
Speak Pills in Phrase, and quack Destruction;
Or roar like _Marshal_, that _Geneva_ Bull,
Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full:
Yet to express a _Scot_, to play that Prize,
Not all those Mouth-Granadoes can suffice.
Before a _Scot_ can properly be curst,
I must, like Hocus, swallow Daggers first.
_Scots_ are like Witches; do but whet your Pen,
Scratch till the Blood comes, they'll not hurt you then.

Now as the Martyrs were compell'd to take
The Shapes of Beasts, like Hypocrites at Stake,
I'll bait my _Scot_ so, yet not cheat your Eyes;
A Scot within a Beast is no Disguise.
No more let Ireland brag her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom since that _Scots'_ Plantation;
Nor can our Feign'd Antiquity obtain,
Since they came in England has Wolves again.
Nature her self does _Scotch_-men Beasts confess,
Making their Country such a Wilderness;
A Land that brings in Question and Suspence
God's Omnipresence but that _Charles_ came thence,
But that _Montrose_ and _Crawford's_ Royal Band
Aton'd their Sin, and Christened half the Land.
Nor is it all the Nation has these Spots,
There is a Church as well as Kirk of Scots,
As in a Picture where the Squinting Paint
Shews Fiend on this Side and on that Side Saint;
He that Saw Hell in's Melancholy Dream,
And in the Twilight of his Fancy's Theme,
Scar'd from his Sins, repented in a Fright,
Had he view'd Scotland had turn'd Proselyte.
A Land where one may pray with curst Intent;
Oh, may they never suffer Banishment!
Had _Cain_ been _Scot_, God would have chant'd his   Doom,
Not forc'd him wander, but confin'd him home.
Like _Jews_ they spread, and as Infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquity.
Hence 'tis they live as Rovers, and defie
This or that Place, Rags of Geography.
They're Citizens o' th' World, they're all in all;
_Scotland's_ a Nation Epidemical.
And yet they ramble not to learn the Mode,
How to be drest, or how to lisp abroad;
To return knowing in the Spanish Shrug,
Or which of the _Dutch_ States a double Jug
Resembles most in Belly or in Beard;
The Card by which the Mariners are Steer'd.
No! The Scots-Errant fight, and fight to eat;
Their Ostrich Stomachs make their Swords their Meat.
Nature with _Scots_ as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to string their Teeth upon their Belt.
Not Gold, nor Acts of Grace, 'tis Steel must tame
The Stubborn _Scot_: A Prince that would reclaim
Rebels by yielding does like him. or worse,
Who saddled his own Back to shame his Horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner Soil,
Thus to lard _Israel_ with _Egypt's_ Spoil?
Lord! what a Goodly Thing is want of Shirts!
How a _Scotch_ Stomach and no Meat converts!
They wanted Food and Raiment, so they took
Religion for their Seamstress and their Cook.
Unmask them well; their Honours and Estate,
As well as Conscience, are Sophisticate.
Shrive but their Titles, and their Money poise;
A Laird and Twenty Pence,[27] pronounc'd with Noise,
When constru'd, but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober Two-pence, and well so.
Hence then,'you Proud Imposters, get you gone,
You _Picts_ in Gentry and Devotion,
You Scandal to the Stock of Verse, a Race
Able to bring the Gibbet in Disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracism, and sham'd it out of Use.
The _Indian_ that Heaven did forswear
Because he heard some _Spaniards_ were there.
Had he but known what _Scots_ in Hell had been,
He would, Erasmus-like, have hung between.
My Muse has done. A voider for the Nonce;
I wrong the Devil should I pick the Bones.
That Dish is his, for when the _Scots_ decease,
Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles.
A _Scot_, when from the Gallows-Tree got loose,
Drops into _Stix_, and turns a _Soland_ Goose. [28]

[Footnote 27: Ten pence Scots was a penny English.]

[Footnote 28: Compare with this the first of the two political squibs
published in the Aungervyle Reprints Series, 2.]



THE MARSEILLAISE.

[Footnote: Written and composed by Roger de Lisle. This translation
has been attributed to Lord Auckland.]


Ye sons of France, awake to glory;
  Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
  Behold their tears, and hear their cries!
Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
  With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
  Affright and desolate the land,
While Peace and Liberty lie bleeding?
    To arms, to arms, ye brave,
      Th'avenging sword unsheath;
    March on, march on, all hearts resolv'd
      On victory or death.

Now, now, the dang'rous storm is rolling
  Which treach'rous kings, confederate, raise;
The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,
  And, lo! our fields and cities blaze;
And shall we basely view the ruin,
  While lawless force, with guilty stride,
  Spreads desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embruing?
      To arms, ye brave, etc.

With luxury and pride surrounded,
  The vile insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
  To mete and vend the light and air.
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
  Like gods, would bid their slaves adore;
  But man is man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad us?
      To arms, ye brave, etc.

O Liberty! can man resign thee,
  Once having felt thy gen'rous flame?
Can dungeons, bolts, and bars confine thee,
  Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
Too long the world has wept, bewailing
  That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield;
  But freedom is our sword and shield,
And all their arts are unavailing.
      To arms, ye brave, etc.




A DIRGE.


Bow the head, thou lily fair,
  Bow the head in mournful guise;
Sickly turn thy shining white,
  Bend thy stalk, and never rise.

Shed thy leaves, thou lovely rose,
  Shed thy leaves, so sweet and gay;
Spread them wide on the cold earth,
  Quickly let them fade away.

Fragrant woodbine, all untwine,
  All untwine from yonder bower;
Drag thy branches on the ground,
  Stain with dust each tender flower,

For, woe is me! the gentle knot
  That did in willing durance bind
My happy soul to hers for life
  By cruel death is now untwined.

Her head, with dim, half-closed eyes,
  Is bowed upon her breast of snow;
And cold and faded are those cheeks
  That wont with cheerful red to glow.

Mute, mute, is that harmonious voice
  That wont to breathe the sounds of love,
And lifeless are those beauteous limbs
  That with such ease and grace did move.

And I, of all my bliss bereft.
  Lonely and sad must ever moan,
Dead to each joy the world can give,
  Alive to memory alone.




FINIS.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Quaint Gleanings from Ancient Poetry, by 
Edmund Goldsmid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUAINT GLEANINGS--ANCIENT POETRY ***

***** This file should be named 6375.txt or 6375.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/7/6375/

Produced by Beth Constantine, David Starner, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
