The Project Gutenberg EBook Forbidden Gospels and Epistles, by Wake, v2
#2 in our series by Archbishop Wake

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Forbidden Gospels and Epistles, Volume 2, The Protevanglion

Author: Archbishop Wake

Release Date: September, 2004  [EBook #6508]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 25, 2002]
[This file was last updated on January 22, 2003]

Edition: 11

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORBIDDEN GOSPELS, BY WAKE, v2 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>
Additional proofing was done by Curtis A. Weyant





                                  THE
                              SUPPRESSED
                          GOSPELS AND EPISTLES
                            OF THE ORIGINAL
                             NEW TESTAMENT
                                   OF
                            JESUS THE CHRIST

          AND OTHER PORTIONS OF THE ANCIENT HOLY SCRIPTURES.
                       NOW EXTANT, ATTRIBUTED TO
                  HIS APOSTLES, AND THEIR DISCIPLES,
       AND VENERATED BY THE PRIMITIVE CHRISTIAN CHURCHES DURING
                       THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES,
                 BUT SINCE, AFTER VIOLENT DISPUTATIONS
                            FORBIDDEN BY THE
                     BISHOPS OF THE NICENE COUNCIL,
                IN THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CONSTANTINE
             AND OMITTED FROM THE CATHOLICS AND PROTESTANT
            EDITIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, BY ITS COMPILERS

         TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL TONGUES, WITH HISTORICAL
                   REFERENCES TO THEIR AUTHENTICITY,

                                  BY
                            ARCHBISHOP WAKE
                               AND OTHER
                            LEARNED DIVINES





                           THE GOSPEL CALLED
                          THE PROTEVANGELION;

Or, an Historical Account of the BIRTH of CHRIST, and the perpetual
VIRGIN MARY, his Mother, by JAMES THE LESSER, Cousin and Brother
of the Lord Jesus, chief Apostle and first Bishop of the Christians in
Jerusalem.



CHAPTER I.

     1 Joachim, a rich man,
     2 offers to the Lord,
     3 is opposed by Reuben the high priest,
     because he has not begotten issue in Israel,
     6 retires into the wilderness and fasts
     forty days and forty nights.


IN the history of the twelve
tribes of Israel we read there
was a certain person called
Joachim, who being very rich, made
double offerings to the Lord God,
having made this resolution:
My substance shall be for the
benefit of the whole people, that
I may find mercy from the Lord
God for the forgiveness of my sins.

2  But at a certain great feast
of  the Lord, when the children of
Israel offered their gifts, and
Joachim also offered his, Reuben the
high-priest opposed him, saying,
it is not lawful for thee to offer
thy gifts, seeing thou hast not
begot any issue in Israel.

3  At this, Joachim being
concerned very much, went away to
consult the registries of the twelve
tribes, to see whether he was the
only person who had begot no
issue.

4  But upon inquiry he found
that all the righteous had raised
up seed in Israel;

5  Then he called to mind the
patriarch Abraham, How that God
in the end of his life had given him
his son Isaac; upon which he was
exceedingly distressed, and would
not be seen by his wife:

6  But retired into the wilderness,
and fixed his tent there, and
fasted forty days and forty nights,
saying to himself,

7  I will not go down either to
eat or drink, till the Lord my
God shall look down upon me, but
prayer shall be my meat and drink.



CHAPTER. II.

     1 Anna, the wife of Joachim mourns her barrenness,
     6 is reproached with it by Judith her maid,
     9 sits under a laurel tree and prays to the Lord.

IN the mean time his wife Anna
was distressed and perplexed
on a double account, and said,
I will mourn both for my widowhood
and my barrenness.

2  Then drew near a great feast
of the Lord, and Judith her maid,
said, How long will you thus
afflict your soul? The feast of
the Lord is now come, when it is
unlawful for any one to mourn.

3  Take therefore this hood
which was given by one who
makes such things, for it is not
fit that I, who am a servant should
wear it, but it well suits a person
of your greater character.

4  But Anna replied, Depart
from me, I am not used to such
things; besides, the Lord hath
greatly humbled me.

5  I fear some ill-designing person
hath given thee this, and thou
art come to reproach me with my sin.

6  Then Judith her maid answered,
what evil shall I wish you,
when you will not hearken to me?

7  I cannot wish you a greater
curse than you are under, in that
God hath shut up your womb, that
you should not be a mother in
Israel.

8  At this Anna was exceedingly
troubled, and having on her wedding
garment, went about three o'clock
in the afternoon to walk in her
garden.

9  And she saw a laurel-tree and
sat under it, and prayed unto the
Lord, saying,

10  O God of my fathers, bless
me and regard my prayer, as thou
didst bless the womb of Sarah;
and gavest her a son Isaac.



CHAPTER III.

     1 Anna perceiving a sparrow's nest in the
     laurels bemoans her barrenness.

AND as she was looking towards
heaven she perceive a sparrow's
nest in the laurel,

2  And mourning within herself,
she said, Wo is me, who begat
me? and what womb did bear
me, that I should be thus
accursed before the children of
Israel, and that they should
reproach and deride me in the
temple of my God: Wo is me,
to what can I be compared?

3  I am not comparable to the
very beasts of the earth, for even
the beasts of the earth are fruitful
before thee, O Lord! Wo is me,
to what can I be compared?

4  I am not compared to the
brute animal, for even the brute
animals are fruitful before thee,
O Lord! Wo is me, to what am I
comparable?

5  I cannot be comparable to
these waters, for even the waters
are fruitful before thee, O Lord!
Wo is me, to what can I be compared?

6  I am not comparable to the
waves of the sea; for these,
whether they are calm, or in motion,
with the fishes which are in them,
praise thee, O Lord! Wo is me to
what can I be compared?

7  I am not comparable to the
very earth, for the earth produces
its fruits, and praises thee, O Lord!



CHAPTER IV.

     1 An Angel appears to Anna and tells her she shall conceive;
     two angels appear on the same errand.
     5 Joachim sacrifices.
     8 Anna goes to meet him,
     9 rejoicing that she shall conceive.

THEN an angel of the Lord
stood by her and said, Anna,
Anna, the Lord hath heard thy
prayer; thou shalt conceive and
bring forth, and thy progeny shall
be spoken of in all the world.

2  And Anna answered, As the
Lord my God liveth, whatever I
bring forth, whether it be male or
female, I will devote it to the Lord
my God and it shall minister to
him in holy things, during its
whole life.

3  And behold there appeared
two angels, saying unto her,
Behold Joachim thy husband is
coming with his shepherds.


4  For an angel of the Lord
hath also come down to him, and
said, The Lord God hath heard
thy prayer, make haste and go
hence, for behold Anna thy wife
shall conceive.

5  And Joachim went down and
called his shepherds, saying, Bring
me hither ten she-lambs without
spot or blemish, and they shall
be for the Lord my God.

6  And bring me twelve calves
without blemish, and the twelve
calves shall be for the priests and
the elders.

7  Bring me also a hundred
goats, and the hundred goats shall
be for the whole people.

8  And Joachim went down with
the shepherds, and Anna stood
by the gate and saw Joachim
coming with the shepherds.

9  And she ran, and hanging
about his neck, said, Now I know
that the Lord hath greatly blessed
me:

10  For behold, I who was as a
widow am no longer as a widow, and
I who was barren shall conceive.



CHAPTER V.

     1 Joachim abides the first day in his house but
     sacrifices on the morrow.
     2 Consults the plate on the priests forehead,
     3 and is without sin.
     6 Anna brings forth a daughter,
     9 whom she calls Mary.

AND Joachim abode the first
day in his house, but on the
morrow he brought his offerings,
and said,

2  If the Lord be propitious to
me let the plate which is on the
priests forehead make it manifest.

3  And he consulted the plate
which the priest wore, and saw it,
and behold sin was not found in
him.

4  And Joachim said, Now I know
that the Lord is propitious
to me, and hath taken away all
my sins.

5  And he went down from the
temple of the Lord justified,
and he went to his own house.

6  And when nine months were
fulfilled to Anna, she brought
forth, and said to the midwife,
What have I brought forth?

7  And she told her, A girl.

8  Then Anna said, The Lord
hath this day magnified my soul;
and she laid her in bed.

9  And when the days of her
purification were accomplished,
she gave suck to the child; and
called her name Mary.



CHAPTER VI.

     1 Mary at nine months old, walks nine steps.
     3 Anna keeps her holy.
     4 When she is a year old, Joachim makes a great feast.
     7 Anna gives her the breast, and sings a song to the Lord.

AND the child increased in
strength every day, so that
when she was nine months old, her
mother put her upon the ground,
to try if she could stand; and
when she had walked nine steps,
she came again to her mother's
lap.

2  Then her mother caught her
up, and said, As the Lord my God
liveth, thou shalt not walk again
on this earth, till I bring thee
into the temple of the Lord.

3  Accordingly she made her
chamber a holy place, and suffered
nothing uncommon or unclean to
come near her, but invited certain
undefiled daughters of Israel, and
they drew her aside.

4  But when the child was a year
old, Joachim made a great feast,
and invited the priests, scribes,
elders, and all the people of
Israel;

5  And Joachim then made an
offering of the girl to the chief-
priests, and they blessed her,
saying, The God of our fathers bless
this girl, and give her a name
famous and lasting through all
generations. And all the people
replied, So be it, Amen:

6  Then Joachim a second time
offered her to the priests, and they
blessed her, saying, O most high
God, regard this girl, and bless
her with an everlasting blessing.

7  Upon this her mother took
her up, and gave her the breast,
and sung the following song to the
Lord.

8  I will sing a song unto the
Lord my God, for he hath visited
me, and taken away from me the
reproach of mine enemies, and
hath given me the fruit of his
righteousness, that it may now be
told the sons of Reuben, that Anna
gives suck.

9  Then she put the child to rest
in the room which she had consecrated,
and she went out and ministered unto
them.

10  And when the feast was
ended, they went away rejoicing,
and praising the God of Israel.



CHAPTER VII.

     3 Mary being three years old, Joachim causes certain virgins to
     light each a lamp, and goes with her to the temple.
     5 The high-priest places her on the third step of the altar, and
     sits dances with her feet.

BUT the girl grew, and when
she was two years old, Joachim
said to Anna, Let us lead her
to the temple of the Lord,
that we may perform our vow,
which we have vowed unto the
Lord God, lest he should be angry
with us, and our offering be
unacceptable.

2  But Anna said, Let us wait
the third year, lest she should
be at a loss to know her father.
And Joachim said, Let us then
wait.

3  And when the child was
three years old, Joachim said,
Let us invite the daughters of the
Hebrews, who are undefiled, and let
them take each a lamp, and let
them be lighted, that the child
may not turn back again, and her
mind be set against the temple of
the Lord,

4  And they did thus till they
ascended into the temple of the Lord.
And the high-priest received her,
and blessed her, and said, Mary,
the Lord God hath magnified thy
name to all generations, and to the
very end of time by thee will the
Lord shew his redemption to the
children of Israel.

5  And he placed her upon the
third step of the altar, and the
Lord gave unto her grace, and she
dance with her feet, and all the
house of Israel loved her.



CHAPTER VIII.

     2 Mary fed in the temple by angels.
     3 When twelve years old the priests consult what to do with her.
     6 The angel of the Lord warns Zacharias to call together all the
     widowers, each bringing a rod.
     7 The people meet by sound of trumpet.
     8 Joseph throws away his hatchet, and goes to the meeting.
     11 A dove comes forth from his rod, and alights on his head.
     12 He is chosen to betroth the Virgin,
     13 refuses because he is an old man,
     14 is compelled,
     16 takes her home, and goes to mind his trade of building.

AND her parents went away
filled with wonder, and praising God,
because the girl did not return back
to them.

2  But Mary continued in the
temple as a dove educated there,
and received her food from the
hand of an angel.

3  And when she was twelve
years of age, the priests met in a
council, and said, Behold, Mary is
twelve years of age, what shall we
do with her, for fear lest the holy
place of the Lord our God should
be defiled?

4  Then replied the priests to
Zacharias the high-priest, Do you
stand at the altar of the Lord, and
enter into the holy place, and make
petitions concerning her, and
whatsoever the Lord shall manifest
unto you, that do.

5  Then the high-priest entered
into the Holy of Holies, and taking
away with him the breast-plate of
judgment made prayers concerning her;

6  And behold the angel of the
Lord came to him, and said,
Zacharias, Zacharias, Go forth and
call together all the widowers
among the people, and let every
one of them bring his rod, and
he by whom the Lord shall shew
a sign shall be the husband of
Mary.

7  And the criers went out
through all Judaea, and the trumpet
of the Lord sounded, and all
the people ran and met together.

8  Joseph also throwing away
his hatchet, went out to meet
them; and when they were met,
they went to the high-priest;
taking every man his rod.

9  After the high-priest had
received their rods, he went
into the temple to pray;

10  And when he had finished
his prayer, he took the rods, and
went forth and distributed them,
and there was no miracle attended
them.

11  The last rod was taken by
Joseph, said behold a dove
proceeded out of the rod, and
flew upon the head of Joseph.

12  And the high-priest said,
Joseph, Thou art the person
chosen to take the Virgin of the
Lord, to keep her for him:

13  But Joseph refused, saying,
I am an old man, and have children,
but she is young, and I fear
lest I should appear ridiculous
in Israel.

14  Then the high-priest replied,
Joseph, Fear the Lord thy God,
and remember how God dealt with
Dathan, Korah, and Abiram, how
the earth opened and swallowed
them up, because of their
contradiction.

15  Now therefore, Joseph, fear
God lest the like things should
happen in your family.

16  Joseph then being afraid,
took her unto his house, and
Joseph said unto Mary, Behold, I
have taken thee from the temple
of the Lord, and now I will leave
thee in my house; I must go to
mind my trade of building. The
Lord be with thee.



CHAPTER IX.

     1 The priests desire a new veil for the temple,
     3 seven virgins cast lots for making different parts of it,
     4 the lot to spin the true purple falls to Mary.
     5 Zacharias, the high priest, becomes dumb.
     7 Mary takes a pot to draw water, and hears a voice,
     8 trembles and begins to work,
     9 an angel Appears and salutes her, and tells her she
     shall conceive by the Holy Ghost,
     17 she submits.
     19 Visits her cousin Elizabeth, whose child in her womb leaps.

AND it came to pass, in a council
of the priests, it was said,
Let us make a new veil for the
temple of the Lord.

2  And the high-priest said,
Call together to me seven undefiled
virgins of the tribe of David.

3  And the servants went and
brought them into the temple of
the Lord, and the high-priest said
unto them, Cast lots before me
now, who of you shall spin the
golden thread, who the blue, who
the scarlet, who the fine linen, and
who the true purple.

4  Then the high-priest knew
Mary; that she was of the tribe of
David; and he called her, and the
true purple fell to her lot to spin,
and she went away to her own
house.

5  But from that time Zacharias
the high-priest became dumb, and
Samuel was placed in his room till
Zacharias spoke again.

6  But Mary took the true purple;
and did spin it.

7  And she took a pot, and
went out to draw water, and heard
a voice saying unto her, Hail thou
who art full of grace, the Lord
is with thee; thou art blessed
among women.

8  And she looked round to the
right and to the left (to see) whence
that voice came, and then trembling
went into her house, and laying
down the water-pot, she took
the purple, and sat down in her
seat to work it.

9  And behold the angel of the
Lord stood by her, and said, Fear
not, Mary, for thou hast found
favour in the sight of God.

10  Which when she heard, she
reasoned with herself what that
sort of salutation meant.

11  And the angel said unto her,
The Lord is with thee, and thou
shalt conceive:

12  To which she replied, What!
shall I conceive by the living God
and bring forth as all other
women do?

13  But the angel returned
answer, Not so, O Mary, but the
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Most High
shall overshadow thee;

14  Wherefore that which shall
be born of thee shall be holy,
and shall be called the Son of the
Living God, and thou shalt call his
name Jesus; for he shall save his
people from their sins.

15  And behold thy cousin Elizabeth,
she also hath conceived a son in her
old age.

16  And this now is the sixth
month with her, who was called
barren: for nothing is impossible
with God.

17  And Mary said, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord; let it be
unto me according to thy word.

18  And when she had wrought
her purple, she carried it to the
high-priest, and the high-priest
blessed her, saying, Mary, the
Lord God hath magnified thy name,
and thou shalt be blessed in all the
ages of the world.

19  Then Mary, filled with joy,
went away to her cousin Elizabeth,
and knocked at the door.

20  Which when Elizabeth heard,
she ran and opened to her, and
blessed her, and said, Whence is
this to me, that the mother of my
Lord should come unto me?

21  For lo! as soon as the voice
of thy salutation reached my ears,
that which is in me leaped and
blessed thee.

22  But Mary, being ignorant of
all those mysterious things which
the archangel Gabriel had spoken
to her, lifted up her eyes to heaven,
and said, Lord! What am I, that
all the generations of the earth
should call me blessed?

23  But perceiving herself daily
to grow big, and being afraid, she
went home, and hid herself from
the children of Israel; and was
fourteen years old when all these
things happened.



CHAPTER X.

     1 Joseph returns from building houses, finds the Virgin
     grown big, being six months gone with child,
     2 is jealous and troubled,
     8 reproaches her,
     10 she affirms her innocence,
     13 he leaves her,
     16 determines to dismiss her privately,
     17 is warned in a dream that Mary is with child by the Holy Ghost,
     20 and glorifies God who had shewn him such favour.

AND when her sixth month was
come, Joseph returned from
his building houses abroad, which
was his trade, and entering into the
house, found the Virgin grown big:

2  Then smiting upon his face,
he said, With what face can I look
up to the Lord my God? or, what
shall I say concerning this young
woman?

3  For I received her a Virgin
out of the temple of the Lord my
God, and have not preserved her
such!

4  Who has thus deceived me?
Who has committed this evil in
my house, and seducing the Virgin
from me, hath defiled her?

5  Is not the history of Adam exactly
accomplished in me?

6  For in the very instant of his
glory, the serpent came and found
Eve alone, and seduced her.

7  Just after the same manner it
has happened to me.

8  Then Joseph arising from the
ground, called her, and said, O
thou who hast been so much
favoured by God, why hast thou
done this?

9  Why hast thou thus debased
thy soul, who wast educated in the
Holy of Holies, and received thy
food from the hand of angels?

10  But she, with a flood of tears,
replied, I am innocent, and have
known no man.

11  Then said Joseph, How
comes it to pass you are with
child?

12  Mary answered, As the Lord
my God liveth, I know not by what
means.

13  Then Joseph was exceedingly afraid,
and went away from her, considering
what he should do with her;
and he thus reasoned with himself:

14  If I conceal her crime, I shall
be found guilty by the law of the
Lord;

15  And if I discover her to the
children of Israel, I fear, lest
she being with child by an angel,
I shall be found to betray the life
of an innocent person.

16  What therefore shall I do?
I will privately dismiss her.

17  Then the night was come
upon him, when behold an angel
of the Lord appeared to him in a
dream, and said,

18  Be not afraid to take that
young woman, for that which is
within her is of the Holy Ghost,

19  And she shall bring forth
a son, and thou shalt call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people
from their sins.

20 Then Joseph arose from his
sleep, and glorified the God of
Israel, who had shewn him such
favour, and preserved the Virgin.



CHAPTER XI.

     3 Annas visits Joseph, perceives the Virgin big with child,
     4 informs the high priest that Joseph had privately married her.
     8 Joseph and Mary brought to trial on the charge.
     17 Joseph drinks the water of the Lord as an ordeal,
     and receiving no harm, returns home.

THEN came Annas the scribe,
and said to Joseph, Wherefore
have we not seen you since
your return?

2  And Joseph replied, Because
I was weary after my journey, and
rested the first day.

3  But Annas turning about
perceived the Virgin big with child.

4 And went away to the priest,
and told him, Joseph in whom you
placed so much confidence, is
guilty of a notorious crime, in
that he hath defiled the Virgin
whom he received out of the temple
of the Lord, and hath privately
married her, not discovering it to
the children of Israel.

5  Then said the priest, Hath
Joseph done this?

6  Annas replied, If you send
any of your servants you will find
that she is with child.

7  And the servants went, and
found it as he said.

8  Upon this both she and Joseph
were brought to their trial, and
the priest said unto her, Mary,
what hast thou done?

9  Why hast thou debased thy
soul, and forgot thy God, seeing
thou wast brought up in the Holy
of Holies, and didst receive thy
food from the hands of angels, and
heardest their songs?

10  Why hast thou done this?

11  To which with a flood of
tears she answered, As the Lord
my God liveth, I am innocent in
his sight, seeing I know no man.

12  Then the priest said to Joseph,
Why hast thou done this?

13  And Joseph answered, As
the Lord my God liveth, I have
not been concerned with her.

14  But the priest said, Lie not,
but declare the truth; thou hast
privately married her, and not
discovered it to the children of
Israel, and humbled thyself under
the mighty hand (of God), that thy
seed might be blessed:

15  And Joseph was silent.

16  Then said the priest
(to Joseph), You must restore to
the temple of the Lord the Virgin
which you took thence.

17  But he wept bitterly, and the
priest added, I will cause you both
to drink the water of the Lord,
which is for trial, and so your
iniquity shall be laid open before
you.--[bitter water that causeth the curse]

18  Then the priest took the water,
and made Joseph drink, and sent him
to a mountainous place,

19  And he returned perfectly
well, and all the people wondered
that his guilt was not discovered.

20  So the priest said, Since the
Lord hath not made your sins
evident, neither do I condemn
you.

21 So he sent them away.

22 Then Joseph took Mary, and
went to his house, rejoicing and
praising the God of Israel.



CHAP. XII.

     1 A decree from Augustus for taxing the Jews.
     5 Joseph puts Mary on an ass, to return to Bethlehem,
     6 she looks sorrowful,
     7 she laughs,
     8 Joseph inquires the cause of each,
     9 she tells him she sees two persons,
     one mourning and the other rejoicing.
     10 The delivery being near, he takes her
     from the ass, and places her in a cave.

AND it came to pass, that there
went forth a decree from
the Emperor Augustus, that all
the Jews should be taxed, who
were of Bethlehem in Judaea.

2  And Joseph said, I will take
care that my children be taxed;
but what shall I do with this young
woman?

3  To have her taxed as my wife
I am ashamed; and if I tax her as
my daughter, all Israel knows she
is not my daughter.

4  When the time of the Lord's
appointment shall come, let him do
as seems good to him.

5  And he saddled the ass, and
put her upon it, and Joseph and
Simon followed after her, and
arrived at Bethlehem within three
miles.

6  Then Joseph turning about
saw Mary sorrowful, and said
within himself, Perhaps she is in
pain through that which is within
her.

7  But when he turned about
again, he saw her laughing, and
said to her,

8  Mary, how happens it, that I
sometimes see sorrow, and sometimes
laughter and joy in thy countenance?

9  And Mary replied to him,
I see two people with mine eyes,
the one weeping and mourning,
the other laughing and rejoicing.

10  And he went again across
the way, and Mary said to Joseph,
Take me down from the ass, for
that which is in me presses to come
forth.

11  But Joseph replied, Whither
shall I take thee? for the place is
a desert.

12 Then said Mary again to Joseph,
take me down, for that which is
within me mightily presses me.

13 And Joseph took her down.

14 And he found there a cave,
and let her into it.



CHAPTER XIII.

     1 Joseph seeks a Hebrew midwife,
     2 perceives the owls stopping in their flight,
     3 the working people at their food not moving,
     8 the sheep standing still,
     9 the shepherd fixed and immoveable,
     10 and kids with their mouths touching
     the water but not drinking.

AND leaving her and his sons
in the cave, Joseph went
forth to seek a Hebrew midwife in
the village of Bethlehem.

2  But as I was going (said Joseph),
I looked up into the air,
and I saw the clouds astonished,
and the fowls of the air stopping in
the midst of their flight.

3  And I looked down towards
the earth, and saw a table spread,
and working people sitting around
it, but their hands were upon the
table and they did not move to
eat.

4  They who had meat in their
mouths did not eat.

5  They who lifted their hands
up to their heads did not draw
them back,

6  And they who lifted them up
to their mouths did not put any
thing in;

7  But all their faces were fixed
upwards.

8  And I beheld the sheep dispersed,
and yet the sheep stood still.

9  And the shepherd lifted up
his hand to smite them, and his
hand continued up.

10  And I looked unto a river,
and saw the kids with their mouths
close to the water, and touching it,
but they did not drink.



CHAPTER XIV.

     1 Joseph finds a midwife.
     10 A bright cloud overshadows the cave.
     11 A great light in the cave, gradually
     increases until the infant is born.
     13 The mid-wife goes out, and tells Salome
     that she has seen a virgin bring forth.
     17 Salome doubts it.
     20 her hand withers,
     22 she supplicates the Lord,
     28 is cured,
     30 but warned not to declare what she had seen.

THEN I beheld a woman coming
down from the mountains,
and she said to me, Where art thou
going, O man?

2  And I said to her, I go to
enquire for a Hebrew midwife.

3  She replied to me, Where is
the woman that is to be delivered?

4  And I answered, In the cave,
and she is betrothed to me.

5  Then said the midwife, Is she
not thy wife?

6  Joseph answered, It is Mary,
who was educated in the Holy of
Holies, in the house of the Lord,
and she fell to me by lot, and is
not my wife, but has conceived by
the Holy Ghost.

7  The midwife said, Is this true?

8  He answered, Come and see.

9  And the midwife went along
with him, and stood in the cave.

10  Then a bright cloud over-
shadowed the cave, and the mid-
wife said, This day my soul is
magnified, for mine eyes have seen
surprising things, and salvation is
brought forth to Israel.

11  But on a sudden the cloud
became a great light in the cave,
so that their eyes could not bear it.

12  But the light gradually
decreased, until the infant appeared,
and sucked the breast of his mother,
Mary.

13  Then the midwife cried out,
and said, How glorious a day is
this, wherein mine eyes have seen
this extraordinary sight!

14  And the midwife went out
from the cave, and Salome met
her.

15  And the midwife said to her,
Salome, Salome, I will tell you a
most surprising thing which I saw,

16  A virgin hath brought forth,
which is a thing contrary to
nature.

17  To which Salome replied, As
the Lord my God liveth unless I
receive particular proof of this
matter, I will not believe that a
virgin hath brought forth.

18  If Then Salome went in, and
the midwife said, Mary, shew thyself,
for a controversy is risen
concerning thee.

19  And Salome received satisfaction.

20  But her hand was withered,
and she groaned bitterly;

21  And said, Woe to me, because
of mine iniquity; for I have
tempted the living God, and my
hand is ready to drop off.

22 Then Salome made her
supplication to the Lord, and said,
O God of my Fathers, remember me,
for I am of the seed of Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob.

23  Make me not a reproach
among the children of Israel, but
restore me sound to my parents.

24  For thou well knowest,
O Lord, that I have performed many
offices of charity in thy name,
and have received my reward from
thee.

25  Upon this an angel of the
Lord stood by Salome, and said,
The Lord God hath heard thy
prayer, reach forth thy hand to
the child, and carry him, and by
that means thou shalt be restored.

26  Salome filled with exceeding
joy, went to the child, and said,
I will touch him.

27  And she purposed to worship
him, for she said, This is a great
king, which is born in Israel.

28  And straightway Salome was
cured.

29  Then the midwife went out
of the cave, being approved by God.

30  And lo! a voice came to Salome.
Declare not the strange things
which thou hast seen, till
the child shall come to Jerusalem.

31  So Salome also departed,
approved by God.



CHAPTER XV.

     1 Wise men come from the east.
     3 Herod alarmed;
     8 desires them if they find the child to bring him word.
     10 They visit the cave and offer the child their treasure,
     11 and being warned in a dream, do not return to Herod,
     but go home another way.

THEN Joseph was preparing to
go away, because there arose
a great disorder in Bethlehem by
the coming of some wise men
from the east,

2  Who said, Where is the King
of the Jews born?  For we have
seen his star in the east, and are
come to worship him.

3  When Herod heard this, he
was exceedingly troubled, and sent
messengers to the wise men, and
to the priests, and enquired of
them in the town-hall,

4  And said unto them, Where
have you it written concerning
Christ the king, or where should
he be born?

5  Then they say unto him, In
Bethlehem of Judaea; for thus it
is written: And thou Bethlehem in
the land of Judah, art not the least
among the princes of Judah, for
out of thee shall come a ruler,
who shall rule my people Israel.

6  And having sent away the
chief priests, he enquired of the
wise men in the town-hall, and
said unto them, What sign was it
ye saw concerning the king that is
born?

7  They answered him, We saw
an extraordinary large star shining
among the stars of heaven, and so
out-shined all the other stars, as
that they became not visible, and
we knew thereby that a great king
was born in Israel, and therefore
we are come to worship him.

8  Then said Herod to them, Go
and make diligent inquiry; and if
ye find the child, bring me word
again, that I may come and worship
him also.

9  So the wise men went forth,
and behold, the star which they
saw in the east went before them,
till it came and stood over the cave
where the young child was with
Mary his mother.

10  Then they brought forth out
of their treasures, and offered unto
him gold and frankincense, and
myrrh.

11  And being warned in a dream
by an angel, that they should not
return to Herod through Judaea,
they departed into their own country
by another way.



CHAPTER XVI.

     1 Herod enraged, orders the infants in Bethlehem to be slain.
     2 Mary puts her infant in an ox-manger.
     3 Elizabeth flees with her son John to the mountains.
     6 A mountain miraculously divides and receives them.
     9 Herod incensed at the escape of John, causes Zacharias
     to be murdered at the altar.
     23 The roofs of the temple rent, the body miraculously
     conveyed, and the blood petrified.
     25 Israel mourns for him.
     27 Simeon chosen his successor by lot.

THEN Herod perceiving that
he was mocked by the wise
men, and being very angry,
commanded certain men to go and
to kill all the children that were
in Bethlehem, from two years old
and under.

2  But Mary hearing that the
children were to be, killed, being
under much fear, took the child,
and wrapped him up in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in an ox-
manger, because there was no
room for them in the inn.

3  Elizabeth also, hearing that
her son John was about to be
searched for; took him and went
up unto the mountains, and looked
around for a place to hide him;

4  And there was no secret place
to be found.

5  Then she groaned within herself,
and said, O mountain of the Lord,
receive the mother with the child.

6  For Elizabeth could not climb up,

7  And instantly the mountain
was divided and received them.

8  And there appeared to them
an angel of the Lord to preserve
them.

9  But Herod made search after
John, and sent servants to Zacharias,
when he was (ministering) at the altar,
and said unto him, Were hast thou hid
thy son?

10  He replied, to them, I am a
minister of God, and a servant at
the altar: how should I know
where my son is?

11  So the servants went back,
and told Herod the whole; at
which he was incensed, and said,
Is not this son of his like to be
king of Israel?

12  He sent therefore again his
servants to Zacharias, saying, Tell
us the truth, where is thy son, for
you know that your life is in my
hand.

13  So the servants went and told
him all this:

14  But Zacharias replied to
them, I am a martyr for God, and
if ye skied my blood, the Lord will
receive my soul.

15  Besides know that ye shed
innocent blood.

16  However Zacharias was murdered
in the entrance of the temple
said altar, and about the partition;

17  But the children of Israel
knew not when he want killed.

18  Then at the hour of salutation
the priests went into the temple
but Zacharias did not according
to custom, meet them and bless them.

19  Yet they still continued
waiting for him to salute them;

20  And when they found he did
not in a long time come, one of
them ventured into the holy place
where the altar was, and he saw
blood lying upon the ground
congealed:

21  When, behold, a voice from
heaven said, Zacharias is murdered,
and his blood shall not be
wiped away, until the revenger
of his blood come.

22  But when he heard this, he
was afraid; and went forth and told
the priests what he had seen and
heard; and they all went in, and
saw the fact.

23  Then the roofs of the temple
howled, and were rent from the
top to the bottom:

24  And they could not find the
body, but only blood made hard
like stone.

25  And they went away, and
told the people, that Zacharias
was murdered, and all the tribes
of Israel heard thereof, and mourned
for him, and lamented three days:

26  Then the priests took
council together concerning
a person to succeed him.

27  And Simeon and the other
priests cast lots, and the lot fell
upon Simeon.

28  For he had been assured by
the Holy Spirit, that he should not
die, till he had seen Christ come in
the flesh.

     (I James wrote this History in Jerusalem: and when the disturbance
     was I retired into a desert place, until the death of Herod, and the
     disturbances ceased at Jerusalem. That which remains is, that I
     glorify God that he hath given me such wisdom to write unto you who
     are spiritual, and who love God: to whom (be ascribed) glory and
     dominion for ever and ever. Amen.)




                          THE PROTEVANGELION.
              Note on the death of Zacharias in, Chap. 16.

There is a story both in the Jerusalem and Babylonish Talmud very similar
to this. It is cited by Dr. Lightfoot, Talmud, Hierosol, in Taanith, fol.
69; and  Talmud. Babyl. in Sanhedr., fol. 96.  "O Rabbi Jochanan said,
Eighty thousand priests were slain for the blood of Zacharias. Rabbi
Judas asked Rabbi Achan, Where did they kill Zacharias? Was it in the
woman's court, or in the court of Israel? He answered, Neither in the
court of Israel, nor in the court of women, but in the court of the
priests; and they did not treat his blood in the same manner as they were
wont to treat the blood of a ram or young goat.   For of these it is
written, He shall pour out his blood, and cover it with dust. But it is
written  here, The blood is in the midst of her: she set it upon the top
of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground. (Ezek. xxiv. 7.) But why
was this? That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance: I have
set his blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.
They committed seven evils that day: they murdered a priest, a prophet,
and a king; they shed the blood of the innocent they polluted the court:
that day was the Sabbath: and the day of expiation.  When therefore
Nebuzaradan came there (viz. to Jerusalem,) he saw his blood  bubbling,
and said to them, What meaneth this? They answered, It is the blood of
calves, lambs, and rams, which we have offered upon the altar. He
commanded  then, that they should bring calves, and lambs, and rams, and
said I will try  whether this be their blood: accordingly they brought
and slew them, but the blood of Zacharias still bubbled, but the blood of
these did not bubble. Then he  said, Declare to me the truth of this
matter, or else I will comb your flesh with iron combs. Then said they to
him, He was a priest, prophet, and judge, who prophesied to Israel all
these calamities which we have suffered from you; but we arose against
him, and slew him.  Then, said he, I will appease him then he  took the
rabbins and slew them upon his (viz. Zacharias's) blood, and he was not
yet appeased. Next he took the young boys from the schools, and slew them
upon his blood; and yet it bubbled. Then he brought the young priests and
slew them  in the-same place, and yet it still bubbled. So he slew at
length ninety-four thousand persons upon his blood, and it did not as yet
cease bubbling, then he drew  near to it, and said, O Zacharias,
Zacharias, thou halt occasioned the death of the  chief of thy
countrymen, shall I slay them all? then the blood ceased, and did bubble
no more."




                    REFERENCES TO THE PROTEVANGELION.

[This Gospel is ascribed to James. The allusions to it in the ancient
Fathers are  frequent, and their expressions indicate that it had
obtained a very general credit in the Christian world. The controversies
founded upon it chiefly  relate to the age of Joseph at the birth of
Christ, and to his being a widower with children, before his marriage
with the Virgin. It seems material to remark, that the legends of the
latter ages affirm the virginity of Joseph, notwithstanding Epiphanius,
Hilary, Chrysostom, Cyril, Euthymius, Thephylaet, Occumenius, and indeed
all the Latin Fathers till Ambrose, and the Greek Fathers afterwards,
maintain the opinions of Joseph's age and family, founded upon their
belief in the authenticity of this book. It is supposed to have been
originally composed in Hebrew. Postellus brought the MS. of this Gospel
from the Levant, translated it into Latin, and sent it to Oporimus,
a printer at Basil, where Bibliander, a Protestant Divine, and the
Professor of Divinity at Zurich, caused it to be printed in 1552.
Postellus asserts that it was publicly read as canonical in the eastern
churches they making no doubt that James was the author, of it. It is,
nevertheless considered apocryphal by some of the most learned divines in
the Protestant and Catholic churches.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORBIDDEN GOSPELS, BY WAKE, V2 ***

********* This file should be named 6508.txt or 6508.zip **********

This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is

indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
