The Project Gutenberg EBook of Snow-Blind, by Katharine Newlin Burt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Snow-Blind

Author: Katharine Newlin Burt


Release Date: February, 2005 [EBook #7520]
Posting Date: July 24, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SNOW-BLIND ***




Produced by Ketaki Chhabra and Wendy Crockett





SNOW-BLIND

By Katharine Newlin Burt


Author Of The Branding Iron, Etc.




CHAPTER I


Under a noon sun the vast, flat country, buried deep in snow, lay like a
paper hoop rimmed by the dark primeval forest; its surface shone with an
unbearable brightness as of sun-struck glass, every crystal gleaming
and quivering with intense cold light. To the north a single blunt, low
mountain-head broke the evenness of the horizon line.

Hugh Garth seemed to leap through paper like a tiny active clown as he
dropped down into the small space shoveled clear in front of his hidden
cabin door. The roof was weighted with drift, so that a curling mass
like the edge of a wind-crowded wave about to break hung low over the
eaves. Long icicles as thick as a man's arm stretched from roof to
ground in a row of twisted columns. Under this overhanging cornice of
snow near the door there was a sudden icy purple darkness.

As Hugh plunged down into it, his face lost a certain rapt brightness
and shadowed deeply. He let slip the load of fresh pelts from his back,
drew his feet from the skis which he stuck up on their ends in the snow,
and removed the fur cap from his head and the huge dark spectacles from
his eyes. Then, crouching, he went in at the low, ill-hung door. It
stuck to its sill, and he cursed it; all his movements expressed the
anger of frustration. He slammed the door behind him.

Buried in drifts, the cabin was dim even at this bright hour of noon.
The stove glowed in a corner with a subdued redness, its bulging cheeks
and round mouth dully scarlet. The low room was pleasant to look at,
for it had the beauty of brown bark and the salmon tints of old rough
boards, and its furniture, wrought painstakingly by an unskillful hand,
had the charm of all handwork even when unskilled. Some of the chairs
were rudely carved, one great throne especially, awkward, pretentious,
and carefully ornate.

There was, too, a solid table in the center of the floor; and on it a
woman was setting heavy earthenware plates nicked and discolored. She
was heavy and discolored herself, but like the stove, she too seemed
to have a dull glow. She was no longer young, but she might still have
encouraged her youthfulness to linger pleasantly; she was not in the
least degree beautiful, but she might have fostered a charm that lurked
somewhere about her small, compact body and in her square, dark face.
Her hair of a sandy brown was stretched back brutally so that her
bright, devoted eyes--gray and honest eyes, very deep-set beneath their
brows--lacked the usual softness and mystery of women's eyes. Her lips
were tight set; her chin held out with an air of dogged effort which
seemed to possess no relation to her mechanical occupation, yet to have
a strong habitual relation to her state of mind. She seemed, in fact,
under a shell of self-control, to conceal an inner light, like a dimly
burning dark-lantern. Her expression was dumb. She moved about like
a deaf-mute. Indeed, her stillness and stony self-repression were
extraordinary.

A youth rose from a chair near the stove and greeted Hugh as he entered.

"Hullo," he said. "How many did you get?"

It was the eager questioning of a modest, affectionate boy who curbs his
natural effervescence of greeting like a well-trained dog. The tone was
astonishingly young, a quiet, husky boy-voice.

"Damn you, Pete!" was snarled at him for answer. "Haven't you got my
boot mended yet?"

The boot, still lacking its heel, lay on the floor near the stove, and
Hugh now picked it up and hurled it half across the room.

"I have to get out into this ice chest of a wilderness and this flaming
glare that cuts my eyeballs open, and work till the sweat freezes on my
face, and then come home to find you loafing by the fire as if you were
a house cat--purring and rubbing against my legs when I come in," he
snarled. "Thanking me for a quiet nap and a saucer of milk, eh? You
loafer! What do I keep you for? You gorge the bread and meat I earn
by sweating and freezing, and you keep your sluggish mountain of bones
covered. A year or two ago I'd have urged you along with a stick. I used
to get some work out of you then. But you think you're too big for that,
now, don't you? You fancy I'm afraid of your bigness, eh? Well, do you
want me to try it out? What about it?"

During the first part of his brother's speech, Pete had faced him, but
in the middle he had turned his back and stood in front of one of the
clumsy windows. He looked out now at a white wall of snow, above which
shone the dazzle of the midday. He whistled very softly to himself and
sank his hands deep into the pockets of his corduroys. He did not answer
the snarling question, but his wide, quiet mouth, exquisitely shaped,
ran into a smile and a dimple, deep and narrow, cut into his thin and
ruddy cheek.

Between the woman, who went on with her work as though no one had come
into the room, and the silent smiling youth, Hugh Garth prowled the
floor like a shadow thrown by a moving light.

He was a man of forty-five, gray-haired, misshapen, heavy above the
waist and light to meanness below; a man lame in one leg and with an
ill-proportioned face, malicious, lined, lead-colored; a man who limped
and leaped about the room with a fierce energy, the while his tongue,
gifted with a rich and resonant voice, poured vitriol upon the silence.

Suddenly the woman spoke. She turned back on the threshold of the
kitchen door through which her work had been taking her to and fro
during Garth's outbreak. Her voice was monotonous and smothered; it had
its share in her unnatural self-repression.

"Why don't you tell him to be quiet, Pete? You've been chopping wood
since daybreak to make up for what he didn't do last week, and you only
came in about ten minutes before he did. Why don't you speak out? You're
getting to be pretty close to a man now, and it isn't suitable for you
to let yourself be talked to that way. You always stand like a fool and
take it from him."

Pete turned. "Oh, well," he answered good-humoredly, "I guess maybe he's
tired. Let up, Hugh, will you? I'll finish your boot after dinner."

"The hell you will! You'll do it now!" Venting on his brother his anger
at the woman's intervention, Garth swung his misshapen body around the
end of the table and thrust an elbow violently against Pete's chest.
The attack was so unexpected that Pete staggered, lost his balance, and
stepping down into the shallow depression of a pebbled hearth, fell,
twisting his ankle. The agony was sharp. After a dumb minute he lifted
a white face and pulled himself up, one hand clutching the board mantel.
"Now you've done it!" he said between his teeth. "How will you get your
pelts to the station now? I won't be able to take them."

There ensued a dismayed silence. The woman had come back from the
kitchen and stood with a steaming dish in her hands. After the brief
pause of consternation she set down the dish and went over to Pete.
"Here," she said, "sit down and let me take off your moccasin and bathe
your ankle before it begins to swell."

Hugh Garth had seated himself in the thronelike chair at the head of the
table. His expression was still defiant, indifferent, and lordly.
"Come and eat your dinner, both of you," he commanded. "You've had your
lesson, Pete. After this, I guess you'll do what I tell you to--not
choose the work that happens to suit your humor. Don't, for God's sake,
baby him, Bella. Don't start being a grandmother before you've ever been
a sweetheart. You're too young for the one even if you're getting a bit
too old for the other!"

Bella flushed deep and hot. She went to her place, and Pete hobbled to
his, opposite his brother. Between them the woman sat, dyed deep in her
sudden unaccustomed wave of scarlet. Pete's whiteness too was stained in
sympathy. But Hugh only chuckled. "As for the pelts," he said royally,
"I'll take them down myself."

Bella looked slowly up.

"You think I don't mean it, I suppose?" Hugh demanded.

They did not answer, but the eyes of the boy and the woman met. This
silence and this dumb exchange of understanding infuriated Garth. He
clinched his hands on the carved arms of his chair and leaned a little
forward.

"I'll take the pelts myself," he repeated boisterously. "I'm not afraid
to be seen at the station. I'm sick of skulking. Buried here--with _my_
talents--in this damn country, spending my days trapping and skinning
beasts to keep the breath in our three useless bodies. Wouldn't death be
better for a man like me? Easier to bear? Fifteen years of it! Fifteen
years! My best years!" He stared over Pete's head. "In all that time no
beauty to feed my starved senses, no work for my starved brain, no hope
for my starved heart." The woman and the youth watched him still in
silence. "That fox I killed this morning had a better life to lose than
I."

"It wouldn't be safe for you to go, Hugh," said Pete gently.

"Why not--watchdog?"

The sneer deepened the flush on Pete's face, but he answered with the
same gentleness, fixing his blue eyes on his brother's.

"Because not two months ago there was a picture of you tacked up in the
post-office."

Bella's face whitened, and Hugh's cheeks grew a shade more leaden.
"T-two months ago!" he stammered painfully; "but that's not p-possible.
They--they've given me up. They've f-forgotten me. They th-think I'm
dead. After fifteen years? My God, Pete! Why didn't you tell me?" He
pleaded the last with a shaken sort of sharpness, in pitiful contrast to
the bombast of the preceding speech.

"I didn't see the good of telling you. I was waiting until this trip to
see if the picture was still there, and maybe to ask some questions."

"What does it mean?" whispered Bella.

"It means they've some fresh reason to hunt me--some fresh impulse--God
knows what or why. How can we tell out here, buried in the snows of
fifteen winters. Well!" He struck his hands down on the table edge and
stood up. He drew his mouth into a crooked smile and looked at the other
two as a naughty child looks at its doting but disapproving elders. The
smile transfigured his ugliness. "I've a fancy to see that picture. Want
to be reminded of what I looked like fifteen years ago. I was a handsome
fellow then. I'm going to take the pelts."

Pete looked dumbly up at him, his lips parted. Bella twisted her apron
about her hands. Both seemed to know the hopelessness of protest. In the
same anxious dumbness they watched Garth make ready for his trip. As he
pulled his cap down close about his ears, Pete at last found his voice.

"Hugh," he began doubtfully, "I wish you wouldn't risk it. We can get on
without supplies until next trading-day, when I'll surely be all right."

"Hold your tongue! I'm going," was the answer. "I tell you, the spirit
of adventure has me. Who knows what I may meet with out there?" He flung
back the door and, pointing with a long arm, stood silhouetted against
the dazzle.

"Beauty? Opportunity? Danger? Hope? Death? I shan't shirk it this time.
I'll meet whatever comes. But--" He came back a step into the room. His
harsh face melted to a shamefaced gentleness; his voice softened. "If
they get me down there, if I _don't_ come back, you two try to think
kindly of me, will you? I know what you think of me now. I know you
won't see me as I am--no one but God will ever do me that kindness; but
you two--be easy with me in your memories."

Bella, her arms now twisted to their red elbows in her apron, took a
few stiff steps across the floor. Her face was expressionless, her eyes
lowered. Garth smiled at them both and went out, shutting the door. They
heard him singing as he put on his skis:

  A hundred men were riding,
  A-hunting for Pierre.
  They rode and rode, but nothing could they find.
  They rode around by moonlight;
  They rode around by day;
  They rode and rode, but nothing could they find.

Then came the sharp scraping of his runners across the surface of the
snow on a level with the buried roof. It lessened from a hissing speech
to a hissing whisper. It sighed away. Bella sat down abruptly on a
chair, pulled in her chin like an unhappy child; her bosom lifted as
though a sob would force its way out.

"If he doesn't come back!" she murmured. "If he doesn't come back!" She
was speaking to God.




CHAPTER II


Pete blinked, swallowed hard and began to talk fast and hopefully.

"He'll come back. I don't believe he'll get halfway there, Bella," he
reassured the woman. "He'll come to his senses. You know how moody he
is. Come over here and doctor up my ankle, please. 'Make a fuss over me,
Bell.' Isn't that what I used to say?"

He coaxed until at last she came and knelt before him and removed his
moccasin and heavy woolen sock. The strong white foot was like marble,
but the ankle was swollen and discolored. Bella clicked her tongue. "He
_is_ a brute, you know!" She laughed shortly. Since Garth's departure
she had become almost a human being. The deaf-mute look had melted from
her, and a sardonic humor emerged; her eyes cleared; she could even
smile. "Why do we care so much for him, Pete--the two of us?"

Pete winced under her touch and puckered his brows. "Because he's such a
kid, I guess. He's always fretting after the moon."

"Don't you ever get angry with him, Pete? He does treat you shameful
sometimes."

"N-no. Not often. He's always sorry and ashamed afterward. He'd like to
be as kind as God. I believe if he could only fool us into thinking he
_was_ God, he could act like Him--ouch, Bella! Go easy."

"You're an awful smart boy, Pete. It's a sin you've never had any
schooling."

"Schooling! Gosh! I've had all the schooling I could digest. Hugh beat
it into me. He's taught me all he had in his head and a whole lot he
never ought to have had there, I guess. But _you've_ taught me most,
Bella--that's the truth of it."

"_Me_! I never knew anything. They saw to that. They never did anything
for me at home but abuse me. Hugh Garth was the only relation I ever had
in the world that spoke kind to me. Remember how I used to run over from
my folks to tuck you into bed in your little room above the shop, Pete?
No, you were too little."

"Of course, I remember," the boy replied. "The ankle's fine now, Bella.
Let up. I can't stand that rubbing. Let me stick the foot up on another
chair. There--that's great. It doesn't hurt near so bad now. I remember
Hugh's bookshop; yes, I do--honest! I remember sitting on the ladder and
listening to him talk to the students when they came in. He always was
a gorgeous talker, Bella. They used to stand around and listen to
his yarns like kids to a fairy story. Just the same as you and I do
now--when we can get him into a good humor. But, you know, he used to
like strangers best--to talk to, I mean."

Bella assented, bitterly. She had begun to clear the table of its almost
untouched meal. "Because he could put it over better with a stranger. It
isn't the _truth_ Hugh likes--about himself, or others."

Pete had begun to whittle a piece of wood. He was a charming figure,
slouching down in his chair, slim and graceful, his shapely golden
head ruffled, his chin pressed against his chest. His expression
was indescribably sweet and boyish, the shadow of anxiety and pain
accentuating a wistful if determined cheerfulness. He was deliberately
entertaining Bella, diverting her mind from its agony of apprehension.
She saw through him, but like a sick child she took the entertainment
languidly.

"Now, _you're_ too dead bent on the truth, Bella. You know you are.
You're a regular bear for the truth."

"I can't see anything else," she said gloomily. "Things are just so to
me--no blinking them."

He put his head a little to one side and contemplated her. "What do you
see when you look into the water-bucket, Bella?"

"The water-bucket?" She flushed. "Just because you caught me prinking
that once!"

"Well, if you had a mirror, what would you see in it, then?"

"An ugly old woman, Pete."

"There! Your mind's just the wrong-side-out of Hugh's. He won't see
himself ugly, and you won't see yourself pretty. I'm the only sane
fellow in this house."

"And you never in your life saw a pretty woman to remember her. Besides,
you're too young." She said it with a tart sweetness and vanished into
the kitchen.

With her departure Pete's whittling ceased, his hands fell slack and he
began to stare out through the snow-walled window. His anxiety for Hugh
slipped imperceptibly into a vague pondering over his own youthfulness.
That's what those two were always telling him, sometimes savagely,
sometimes tenderly! "You're too young." What did it mean to him, anyhow,
that he was "too young"? A desolation from which at times he suffered in
secret overcame him.

He was twenty-one or -two--or his memory lied. They had never celebrated
his birthdays, but he was five or six years old when Hugh had been
so suddenly, so unexplainably taken from the house, back there in the
little Eastern college town where they had lived. It was a few months
later that Bella--Cousin Bella, who worked at "the farm"--came for him,
a furtive, desperate Bella with a bruised face--a Bella tight-strung for
flight, for a breaking of the galling accustomed ties of her life, for a
terrible plunge into unknown adventure. She had muttered to him, as
she dressed him and bundled together a few of his belongings, that they
"were going to Hugh"--only it was another name she used, a name since
blotted from their lives.

Hugh had sent for them. She was the only person in the world that Hugh
could trust. But no one must know where they were going. They must be
away by the time the man who took charge of the shop came back in the
morning.

Pete remembered the journey. He remembered the small frontier station
where they left the train at last. He remembered that strange, far-flung
horizon, streaked with dawn, and his first taste of the tangy, heady
air. There had been a long, long drive and a parting with the friendly
driver where Bella turned on to the trail through the woods. It had been
dim and dark and terrible among the endless regiments of trees--mazy
and green and altogether bewildering. And after vague hop-o'-my-thumb
wanderings, he had a disconnected memory of Hugh--a wild, rugged,
ragged, bearded Hugh who caught him up fiercely as though he had an
ogrish hunger for the feel of little boys. It was night when they came
to Hugh's hiding-place. For miles Pete had been carried in his
brother's arms. Bella had limped behind them. There had been a ford,
he remembered; the splashing water had roused Pete, and he stayed awake
afterward until he found himself before a dancing fire of logs in a
queer, dark, resinous-smelling house, very low, with unglazed windows.
He remembered, too, that Bella had burst out crying. That was the
queerest memory of them all--that crying of Bella's.--Even now he could
not understand exactly why she had cried so then.

The frightened, furtive life they had all led since--the life of scared
wild things--had left its mark on Pete. His fear for Hugh now threw him
back into the half-forgotten state of apprehension which had been the
atmosphere of all his little boyhood. He had not known then why strange
men were creatures to be feared and shunned. In fact, he had never
been told the reason for Hugh's flight. Only, bit by bit, he had pieced
together hints and vague allusions until he knew that this strange,
embittered, boasting poet of a brother had killed or had been accused of
killing. In his loyal boy mind Hugh Garth was promptly acquitted. It was
the world that was wrong--not Hugh. Yet to-day, after all the long years
of carefulness, he had gone back to the cruelty of the world.

Like a beast the boy's anxiety for his brother began to prowl about the
walls of his mind. He imagined Hugh appearing at the trading-station. He
pictured the curious glances of the Indians and the white natives.
This limping, extravagant, energetic Hugh with his whitening hair and
eyebrows and flaring hazel eyes--with his crooked nose and mouth,
his magnificently desperate manner and his magnificently desperate
voice--attention would inevitably fasten upon him anywhere; how much
more in an empty land such as this! Pete fancied the inquiring looks
turned from the man to the man's posted picture. It was no longer a
faithful likeness, of course; still, it was a likeness. There was no
other man in all the world like Hugh! He was made of odd, fantastic
fragments, of ill-fitting parts--physically, mentally, spiritually. It
was as if a soul had seen itself in a crooked mirror and had fashioned a
form to match the distorted image. Hugh wouldn't, couldn't force himself
to be inconspicuous. He would swagger; he would talk loud; his big,
beautiful voice would challenge attention, create an audience. He would
have some impossible, splendid tale to tell.

Pete sat up straighter in his chair, gingerly rearranging the ankle, and
lifted his blue and haunted eyes--the eyes of the North--to the window.

The dazzle of noon had faded to a glow. The short winter day was nearly
done. There would be a long violet twilight, and then, the blaze of
stars.

But for his aching ankle Pete would be sliding out on soundless skis,
now poised for breathless flight down some long slope, now leaping
fallen trees or buried ditches. He spent half of his wild young
restlessness in such long night runs when, in a sort of ecstasy, he
outraced the stifled longings of his exiled youth. But there would be
no ski-running for several nights now. He was a prisoner, and at a time
when imprisonment was hard to bear.

If only there were some way of getting quick news of Hugh! Why had
Bella and he let this thing happen? Why had they stood helplessly by and
allowed the rash fool to go singing to his own destruction? They might
have held him by force, if not by argument, long enough to bring him
to his senses. They had been weak; they were always weak before Hugh's
magnetic strength--always the audience, the following; Bella, for
all her devastating tongue, no less than himself. And Hugh's liberty,
perhaps his life, might be the price of their acquiescence.

Straining forward in his chair, listening, there came to Pete, across
the silence, the sound of skis.

He rose and hopped to the door, flinging it wide. He could not see above
the top of the drift which rose just beyond the roof to a height of nine
or ten feet, but listening intently, he thought he recognized a familiar
slight unevenness in the sliding of the skis.

"Bella!" he shouted, his boy-voice ringing with relief. "Bella! Here's
Hugh. He's come back."

Bella was instantly at his side. They stood waiting in the doorway.
Against the violet sky darkening above the blue wall of snow, a bulky
figure rose, blotting out the light. It half slid, half tumbled down
upon them, clumsy and shapeless.

"Let us in," panted Hugh. "Let us in."

Slipping his feet from the straps of his skis, he staggered past them
and they saw that he was carrying a woman in his arms.




CHAPTER III


"Shut the door," Hugh whispered, and laid his burden down on a big
black bear-hide near the stove. He knelt beside it. He had no eyes for
anything else. Pete, hobbling to him, gazed curiously down, and Bella
knelt opposite and drew away Hugh's mackinaw coat, with which he had
wrapped his trove. It was not a woman whom they looked down upon, but
a girl, and very young--perhaps not yet seventeen--a girl with cropped
dark curly hair and a face so wan and blue and at the same time so
scorched by the snow-glare that its exquisiteness of feature was all the
more marked. Hugh's handkerchief was tied loosely across her eyes.

"I heard her crying in the snow," he said with ineffable tenderness;
"crying like a little bleating lamb with cold and pain and hunger
and fright--the most pitiful thing in God's cruel trap of life. She's
blind--snow-blind."

Pete gave a sharp exclamation, and Bella gently removed the
handkerchief. The small figure moaned and moved its head. The lids of
her eyes were swollen and discolored.

"Snow-blind," echoed Bella.

"A bad case," said Hugh. "Get her some soup, Bella, and--perhaps, hot
water--I don't know." He looked up helplessly.

Bella went to the kitchen. She had regained her old look of dumbness.
Beside the figure on the floor Pete touched one of the girl's small
clenched hands. It was like ice. At the touch she moaned, and Hugh
ordered sharply: "Let her alone." So the boy dragged himself up again
and stood by the mantel, watching Hugh with puzzled and wondering eyes.

"Think what she's been through," Hugh murmured, "that little delicate
thing, wandering for two days, out in this cold--scared by the woods,
blinded by the pain, starving. When I found her, you'd have thought
she'd be afraid of a wild man like me, but she just lifted up her arms
like a baby and dropped her head on my shoulder. She--she patted my
cheek--"

Bella brought the soup, and Hugh, raising the small black head on the
crook of his arm, forced a spoonful between the clenched teeth. The girl
swallowed and began again to whimper: "Oh, my eyes! My eyes! They hurt
me so!" She turned her face against Hugh's chest and clung to him.

"They'll be better soon," he soothed her; then fiercely to Bella: "Can't
we do something? Don't you know what to do?"

Again Bella went to the kitchen, moving like an automaton. Hugh coaxed
and murmured, feeding the girl in spite of her pain. He managed to force
a little of the soup down her throat, and a faint stain of color came
back to her lips and cheeks. Bella presently reappeared with salve and
lotion, and Hugh helped her hold the swollen lids apart, his big hands
very skillful, while she gently washed out the eyes. Then they put the
salve on her sun-scorched face. She sighed as though in some relief, and
again snuggled against Hugh.

"Don't go away, please," she pleaded in a sweet trickle of voice. "I'm
scared to feel you gone. You're so warm. You're so strong. Will you talk
to me again, please? Your voice is so comforting, so beau-ti-ful."

So Hugh talked. The others drew away and watched and listened. They did
not look at each other. For some reason Pete was ashamed to meet Bella's
eyes. As usual, they were the audience, those two. They sat, each in a
chair, the width of the room apart; below them, his grizzled head and
warped face transfigured by its new tenderness, Hugh bent over the child
in his arms. Pete held his tumult of curiosity, of interest, in leash.
He could hear his heart pounding.

"You're safe now, and warm," Hugh was murmuring. "No need to be scared,
no need. I'll take care of you. Go to sleep. I'm strong enough to keep
off anything. You're safe and snug as a little bird in its nest. That's
right. Go to sleep."

Pete's blue eyes dwelt on this amazing spectacle with curious wonder.
This was a Hugh he had never seen before. For the first time in fifteen
years, he realized, the man had forgotten himself.




CHAPTER IV


To Hugh Garth the girl told her story at last. She seemed to realize
only dimly that there were two other living beings in this house, to
her a house of darkness peopled only by voices--Pete's modest, rare boy
speeches, Bella's brief, smothered statements. The great music of Hugh's
utterance must indeed have filled her narrowed world. So it was to him
she turned--he was always near her, sitting on the pelt beside the chair
to which, after a day and night in Bella's bed, she was helped.

She had a charming fashion of speech, rather slow motions of her lips,
which had some difficulty with "r" and "s," a difficulty which she
evidently struggled against conscientiously, and as she talked, she
gesticulated with her slim little hands. She was a touching thing
sitting there in Hugh's carved throne--he an abdicated monarch at her
feet, knee in hand, grizzled head tilted back, hazel eyes raised to her
and filled with adoration.

"I am called Sylvie Doone," she said with that quaint struggle over
the "S." "I was always miserable at home." She gave the quick sigh of
a child. "You see, my father died when I was very little, and then my
mother married again. We lived in the grimmest little town, hardly
more than a dozen houses, beside a stream, up in Massachusetts--farming
country, but poor farming, hard farming, the kind that twists the men
with rheumatism, and makes the women all pinched and worn. Mother
was like that. She died when I was thirteen. You see--there I was, so
queerly fixed. I had to live with Mr. Pynche--there was no other home
for me anywhere. And he kind of resented it. He had enough money not
to need me for work--a sister of his did the housework better than I
could--and yet he was poor enough to hate having to feed me and pay for
my clothes. I was always feeling in the way, and a burden. There was
nothing I could do.

"Then I saw something about the movies in a magazine, and pictures of
girls, not much better-looking than me, making lots of money. I borrowed
some money from a drug-store clerk who wanted to keep company with
me--I've paid it back--and I went to New York. I did get a job. But I'm
not a good actress."

She faltered over the rest--a commonplace story of engagements, of
failures, until she found herself touring the West with a wretched
theatrical troupe. "We were booked for a little town off there beyond
your woods, and the train was stalled in a snowstorm. We got on a
stage-coach, but it got stuck in a drift on one of those dreadful roads.
I was freezing cold, and I thought I'd make a short cut through the
woods. The road was running along the edge of a big forest of pines. I
cut off while they were all working to dig out the horses.

"Mr. Snaring said, 'Look out for the bears!' and I laughed and ran up
what looked like a snow-buried trail. There was a hard crust. The woods
were all glittering and so beautiful. I ran into them, laughing. I was
so glad to get away by myself from those people into the woods where it
was so silent and sort of solemn--like being in a church again. I can't
think how I got so lost. I meant to come round back to the road, but
before I knew it, I didn't know which way the road was. The pines were
so dense, so all alike, they looked almost as if they kept sort of
shifting about me. I tried to follow back on my footprints, but in
some places snow had shaken down from the branches. And there were so
many--so dreadfully many other tracks--of animals--" She put her hands
over her face and shrank down in her chair.

"Forget about them, Sylvie," Hugh admonished gently. "Even if there had
been bears about, they wouldn't likely have bothered you any."

"I can't bring myself to tell you about that time--I can't!"

"Don't, then--only, how did you live through the night, my dear?"

"I don't know--except that I never stayed still. I got out from the
trees because I was afraid of bears, and I lost my hat. The sun was like
fire shining up from underneath and down from up above. My eyes began
to hurt almost at once, and by the time night came, it was agony. The
darkness didn't seem to help me any either; the glare still seemed to
come in under my lids. I couldn't sleep for the pain. I knew I'd
freeze if I stood still, so I kept moving all night, trampling round in
circles, I suppose. Next morning the terrible glare began again. Then
everything went red. I was nearly crazy when you found me, Mr. Garth."

"Please call me Hugh," he murmured, taking her hand in his. "I feel in a
way that you belong to me now--I saved you from dying alone there in the
cold and brought you back to my home. I've got jettison rights, Sylvie."
She let him hold her hand, and flushed.

"You'll never know what it felt like to hear your voice call to me, to
feel you pulling me up. I'd only just dropped a few minutes before, but
I'd never have struggled up. It would have been the end." She trembled
in the memory, and he patted her hand. "I don't know why a man like
you lives off here in this wild place, but thank God, you do live here!
Though," she added with wistfulness, twisting her soft mouth, "though I
can't ever quite see why God should care much for a Sylvie Doone." She
touched the lids of her closed eyes. "I wonder why it doesn't worry me
more not to be able to see. Now that the pain's gone, I don't seem to
care much."

"Thank God. Perhaps, though," he added half-grudgingly, "in a few days
you'll see again."

She smiled. "I'd just love to see _you_. You must be wonderful!"

"What makes you think that?" he asked, his warped face glowing.

"You're so strong and young, such thick hair, such finely shaped hands
and such a voice." Sylvie's associates had been of a profession that
deals perpetually in personalities. "If I'd been blind a long time, I
suppose I could just run my hand over your face, and I'd know what you
look like. But I can't tell a thing." She felt for his face and brushed
it eagerly with her fingers, laughing at herself. "I just know that you
have thick eyelashes and are clean-shaven. Is Bella your wife? And that
big little boy your son?"

He started. "No, she's a faithful thing, the boy's nurse. And the
kid's my young brother--a great gawk of a boy for his age, a regular
bean-pole."

"It's so hard to tell anything about people if you can't see them. I
wouldn't have thought he was so big. Is he about fourteen or fifteen? He
speaks so low and gently; he might be any age."

"And a man's height--pretty near too big to lick, though he needs it."

"And Bella, what's she like?"

"A dried-up mummy of a woman."

The kitchen door creaked. Hugh started and shot a look over his
shoulder. Bella stood on the kitchen threshold with an expressionless
face and lowered eyelids.

"Why did you jump?" asked Sylvie nervously.

Hugh wet his lips with his tongue. "Nothing. The door creaked. Go on.
Tell me more, child," he urged.

"No. I want to hear about you now. Tell me your story."

Hugh clenched his hands and flushed darkly. He glanced over his shoulder
with a furtive look, but Bella had gone.

"No one else rightly knows my story, Sylvie. Will you promise me never
to speak of it, to Bella, to Pete, to any one?"

"Of course, I promise." Her face beamed with the pride of a child
entrusted with a secret.

Then, lowering his voice and moving closer to her chair, he began a
fictitious history, a history of persecuted and heroic innocence, of
reckless adventure, of daring self-sacrifice. The girl listened with
parted lips. Her cheeks glowed. And behind the door, Bella too listened,
straining her ears.

The murmur of Hugh's recital, rising now and then to some melodramatic
climax, then dropping cautiously, rippled on, broken now and again by
Sylvie's ejaculations. Behind the door Bella stood like a wooden block,
colorless and stolid as though she understood not a syllable of what
she heard. But after a rigid hour she faltered away, stumbled across the
kitchen and out into the snow.

There, in the broad light of the setting sun, Pete rhythmically bent and
straightened over his saw. The tool sang with a hissing, ringing rhythm,
and the young man drove it with a lithe, long swing of body, forward and
back, forward and back, in alternate postures of untiring grace. The
air was not cold. There was the cloudy softness premonitory of a spring
storm; the sun glowed like a dying fire through a long, narrow rift in
the shrouded west. Pete had thrown aside his coat and drawn in his belt.
The collar of his flannel shirt was open and turned back; his head was
bare. The bright gold of his short hair, the scarlet of his cheeks,
the vivid blue of his brooding eyes, made shocks of color against the
prevailing whiteness. Even the indigo of his overalls and the dark gray
of his shirt stood out with a curious value of tint and texture. His
bare hands and forearms glowed. He was whistling with a boy's vigor and
a bird's sweetness.

Bella caught Pete's arm as it bent for one of the strong forward sweeps.
He stopped, let go of his saw, and turned to her, smiling.

Then--the smile gone: "What's wrong?"

Her eyes flamed in her pale, tense face. "We've got to stop it, Pete,"
she said. "It's horrible!"

"What? Don't stand out here with those bare arms, Bella." He was pulling
his own shirt-sleeves down over his glistening bronze forearms as he
spoke.

"We can't talk in the house," she said, "and I've got to talk. I--Do you
know what Hugh's doing--what he's telling that girl? What he's letting
her believe?"

Pete shook his head, but at the same time turned his blue eyes away from
her toward the glowing west.

"Lies," said Bella. She laughed a short, explosive laugh. "He's got his
ideal audience at last--a blind one. She thinks he's young and handsome
and heroic. Pete, she thinks he's a hero. She thinks he's buried himself
out here for the sake of somebody else. Oh, it's a regular romance, and
it's been going on for hours--it's still going on. By now he believes
it all himself. He's putting in the details. And Sylvie: 'Oh!' she's
saying, and 'Ah, Mr. Garth, how you must have suffered! How
wonderful you are!' And--look at me Pete--do you want to know what we
are--according to him--you and I?"

He did not turn his eyes from the west, even when she shook his arm.

"I'm a dried-up mummy of a woman--faithful?--yes, I'm faithful--an old
servant. And you're a child, an overgrown bean-pole of a boy, fourteen
or fifteen years old."

The young man stood tall and still--a statue of golden youth in the
golden light--the woman clutching at his arm, her face twisted, her eyes
afire, all the colorlessness of her body and the suppressed flame of her
spirit pitilessly apparent.

"Look at me, Pete."

"Well," he sighed gently, "what of it?" He looked down at her and
smiled. "It's the first good time he's had for fifteen years. You know
we don't make him happy. I don't grudge him his joy, Bella, do you?
It can't last long, anyway. Fairy tales can't hurt her--Hugh
believes--almost--in his own inventions. She'll be going back--her
friends will be hunting for her. I'll let her think I'm a bean-pole of a
boy if it makes him any happier to have me one. And why do you care?"

She drew in her breath. "Oh, I don't suppose I care--so much," she said
haltingly. "But--think of the girl."

His eyes widened a little and fell. "The girl?"

"She's falling in love with him!"

Pete threw back his head and laughed aloud. "Oh, Bella, you know,
_that's_ funny!"

"It's not. It's tragic. It's horrible. You'll see. Watch her face."

"I have watched it." He spoke dreamily. "It's a very pretty and sweet
face."

"Pete, Hugh's robbing _you_."

"Me?"

"Yes, you're young. You're ready for loving. This child--God sent her to
you, to get you out of this desolation, to lead you back to loving and
living, to give you what you ought to have--Life."

It was as though she had struck him. He started and drew himself away.
"Shut up, Bella," he said with boyish roughness and limped past her into
the house.




CHAPTER V


In these days Hugh must have known that his magic-making, as he led the
little blind girl through the forest of his romancing, was at the mercy
of those two that knew him for what he really was; except for queer,
wild, threatening looks now and again, he gave no sign. He played his
part magnificently, even trusting them to come in with help when they
were given their cue. He had dominated them for so long that even they
and the picture of him that they held in their minds were not so real
as his dreams. It was a queer game, queer and breathless, played in this
narrow space shut in by the white wilderness. And as the slow days went
by, the low log house seemed to be filled more and more with smothered
and conflicting emotions. A dozen times the whole extravaganza came near
collapse; a dozen times Hugh saved it by a word, or Pete and Bella by a
silence. Their parts were not easy, and although Pete still smiled,
his young clear face grew whiter and more strained. Sylvie treated him
always as though he were a child. She would pat his head and rumple his
hair if he sat near her; once, suddenly, she kissed him lightly on the
cheek, after he had moved the chair for her.

"You're a dear, quiet boy," she said. "I frightened you to death, then,
didn't I? Hasn't anyone ever kissed you before?" His cheek burned so
that, touching it with her fingers, she laughed. "I've made you blush,
poor kid! I know. Boys hate petting, don't they? You'll have to get used
to it, Pete, because I mean to pet you--oh, a lot! You need some one
to draw you out. These two people snub you too much. Boys of
fourteen aren't quite children, after all, are they? Besides, they're
interesting. I know. I was fourteen myself not such ages back. You're
not cross, are you, Pete?"

His eyes were misty, and his hands were cold. He could not understand
his own emotion, his own pain. He muttered something and got himself
away. She called him "sullen" and was angry with him, complaining to
Hugh at supper that "Petey" had been "a bear" to her. Hugh simulated a
playful annoyance and began to scold; then a sort of nervous fury came
over him. He stamped and struck the table and snarled at Pete. The young
man rose at his place and stared at his brother silently. There were two
splotches of deep color on his cheeks. Sylvie protested: "Don't, please,
be so angry with him. I was only teasing, just in fun. Bella, tell
Hugh to stop. I had no business to kiss Pete. But I just wanted to pet
something."

Hugh's threatening suddenly stopped, and Pete sat down. In the
strained silence Bella laughed. Her laughter had the sound of a snapped
bow-string. Sylvie had pushed her chair back a little from the table and
was turning her head quickly from one to the other of them. Her mouth
showed a tremble of uncertainty. It was easy to see that she sensed a
tension, a confusion. Hugh leaned forward and broke into a good-humored
rattle of speech, and as Pete and Bella sat silent, Sylvie gradually was
reassured. Near the end of the meal she put out her hand toward Pete.

"Please don't be so cross with me, Pete! Give me a shake for
forgiveness."

He touched her hand, his eyes lowered, and drew his fingers away. She
laughed.

"How shy you are--a wild, forest thing! I'll have to civilize you."

"Leave him alone," admonished Hugh softly, "leave him alone."

As he said this, he did not look at Sylvie, but gazed somberly at Pete.
It was a strange look, at once appealing and threatening, pitiful and
dangerous. Pete fingered his fork nervously. Finally Bella stood up and
began to clear the table with an unaccustomed clatter of noisy energy.

"How long are you going to keep it up, Pete?" she asked him afterward.
He was helping her wash the dishes, drying them deftly with a piece of
flour-sacking.

"Since we've let it begin, we'll have to go on with it to a finish," he
answered coldly. "After all"--he paused, polished a platter and turned
away to put it on its shelf--"he's not doing anything so dreadful--just
twisting the facts a little. I _am_ an ignorant lout. I might as well be
fourteen, for all I know."

"And I _am_ a mummy of a woman?"

In pity for her he made to put his arm about her. "Don't be a goose,
Bella," he said, but she flung his hand from her. "Why does it make you
so sore and angry?" he asked wistfully. "Hugh is not pretty to look
at, but perhaps Sylvie sees him better than we do--in a way; and if she
learns to love him while she's blind, then, when she sees him, if she
ever sees him--"

"Chances are she never will. If her eyes don't get better soon, they
likely never will."

"Isn't it horrible?"

"You don't seem to think so. So long's she has Hugh to paint pictures
for her, what does she need eyes for? What's to come of it, Pete? She's
falling in love with the fine figure of a hero he's made her believe he
is. But how can he marry her?"

"Couldn't he go off somewhere else and marry her and start again?
Honest, I think if Hugh had some one who thought he was a god, he'd
likely enough be one. He--he lives by--illusion--isn't that the word?
It's kind of easy to be noble when some one you love believes you to be,
isn't it? That's Hugh; he--"

Bella threw down her rag, turned fiercely upon him and gripped his
shoulders.

"Are you a man or a child?" she said. "You love this girl yourself!"

"No!" he cried and broke from her and went limping out into the frosty
night with its comfortless glitter of stars.

As soon as his ankle was stronger, Pete spent all day and most of the
night on his skis, trying to outrun the growing shadow of his misery.
Hugh's work fell on his shoulders. He had not only his accustomed
chores, the Caliban duties of woodchopping and water-carrying, the
dressing of wild meat, the dish-drying and heavier housework, the
repairs about the cabin--but he had the trapping. In Hugh's profound
new absorption he seemed to have forgotten the necessity for making a
livelihood. During the first years of their exile they had lived on his
savings, ordering their supplies by the mail, which left them at the
foot of that distant trail leading into the forest. Thence Hugh, under
shelter of night, would carry them--lonely, terrible journeys that taxed
even his strength. When Pete grew big enough to load, he was sent to the
trading-station, and Hugh became an expert trapper. The savings were
not entirely spent, but they were no longer touched; the pelts brought a
livelihood.

Pete had had his instructions concerning his behavior at the
trading-station; many years before, he had stammered a legend of a
sickly father who had died, who was buried back there by the lonely
cabin where he and his "mother" chose to live. Bella and Hugh had even
dug up a mound for which they had fashioned a rude cross. It could
be seen, in summer, from the living-room window--that mock grave more
terrible in its suggestions than a real grave ever could have been.
There was also a hiding-place under the boards of the floor. No one
had ever seen the grave or driven Hugh into hiding. It was not an
inquisitive country, and its desolation was forbidding. Pete had learned
to discourage the rare sociability of the other traders.

Now, however, the young man had not only to trade his pelts but to trap
them, and for this business of trapping which was distasteful to him, he
had not a tithe of Hugh's skill. His bundle of pelts brought him a sorry
supply of necessities. He was ashamed, himself, and having dumped the
burden from his shoulders to the kitchen floor would hurry into the
other room, not to see Bella's expression when she opened her bundles.

To-night Pete was tired; the load had not been heavy, but the snow was
beginning to soften under the mild glowing of an April sun, and his skis
had tugged at his feet and gathered a clogging mass. His body ached,
and there was a sullen and despairing weight upon his spirit. A mob
of rebels danced in his heart. He watched Hugh's face, saw the flaring
adoration of his eyes, thought that Sylvie must feel the scorch of them
on her cheek, so close. In his own eyes there showed a brooding fire.

Bella broke into the room.

"Look here," she said, "you'd better get to trapping again, Hugh Garth.
Pete's pelts don't bring a quarter of what we need--especially these
days."

Sylvie quivered as though a wound had been touched. "Oh, you mean me,"
she said, "I know you mean me. I'm making trouble. I'm eating too much.
I'll go. Pete, has anybody been asking about me at the post-office,
trying to find me? They _must_ be hunting for me." She had stood up and
was clasping and unclasping her hands. Hugh and Pete protested in one
breath: "Nonsense, Sylvie!"

And Pete went on with: "There hasn't been anyone asking about you,
but--so much the better for us. You're safe here, and comfortable,
aren't you? And--Hugh, _you_ tell her what it means to us to have her
here."

It was more of a speech than he had made since Sylvie's arrival, and it
was not just the speech, in tone or manner, of a fourteen-year-old boy.
There was a new somber note in his voice, too--some of the youthful
quality had gone out of it. Sylvie took a step toward him, to thank
him, perhaps, perhaps to satisfy, by laying her hand upon him, a sudden
bewilderment; but in her blindness she stumbled on the edge of the
hearth, and to save her from falling, Pete caught her in his arms.
For an instant he held her close, held her fiercely, closer and more
fiercely than he knew, and Sylvie felt the strength of him and heard the
pounding of his heart. Then Hugh plucked her away with a smothered oath.
He put her into a chair, crushed her hand in one of his, and turned upon
Bella.

"Go back into the kitchen," he ordered brutally; "trapping's not your
business. You mind your cooking."

"Be careful, Hugh!" Bella's whisper whistled like a falling lash, "I'll
not stand that tone from you. Be careful!"

"Oh," pleaded Sylvie, "why do you all quarrel so? Off here by yourselves
with nobody else to care, I'd think you would just love each other. I
love you all--yes, I do, even you, Bella, though I know you hate _me_.
Bella, _why_ do you hate me? Why does it make you so angry to have me
here? Does it make your work so much harder? I'll soon be better; I'm
learning to feel my way about. I'll be able to help you. I should think
you'd be glad to have a girl in the house--another woman. I'm sorry to
be a nuisance, really I am. I'd go if I could."

The lonely, deep silence, always waiting to fall upon them, shut down
with suddenness at the end of her sweet, tearful quaver of appeal. For
minutes no one spoke. Then Pete followed Bella out of the room. She
had not answered Sylvie's beseeching questions, but had only stood with
lowered head, her face working, her hands twisting her dress. She had
run out just as her face cramped as though for tears.

When the other two had gone, Hugh captured both of Sylvie's hands in
his. "You don't mean that, do you?" he asked brokenly. "You don't mean
you'd go away if you could, Sylvie!"

At Hugh's voice she started and the color rushed into her cheeks. "If I
make you quarrel, if I'm a nuisance, if Pete and Bella hate me so!"

"But I"--he said--"I love you." He drew her head--she was sitting in her
chair again--against his side. "No, don't smile at me like that; I don't
mean the sort of love you think. I love you terribly. Can't you feel how
I love you? Listen, close against my heart. Don't be frightened. There,
now you know how I love you!"

He rained kisses on her head resting droopingly against him.

"How can a man like you love _me_?" she asked with wistful uncertainty.

"A man like me?" Hugh groaned. "Ah, but I do--I do! You must stay with
me always. Sylvie, somehow we will be married--you--and I!"

"Now it frightens me," she whispered, "being blind. It does frighten
me now. I want so terribly to see your face, your eyes. Oh, you mustn't
marry a blind girl, a waif. You've been so noble, you've suffered so
terribly. You ought to have some wonderful woman who would understand
your greatness, would see all that you are."

"Now," he sighed, "now I _am_ great--because you think I am; that's
water to me--after a lifetime of thirst."

"Hugh, _am_ I good enough for you?" She was sobbing and laughing at the
same time.

It was too much for him. He drew himself gently away. He whispered: "I
can't bear being loved--being happy. I'll go out by myself for a bit
alone. Sylvie, Sylvie! Every instant I--I worship _you_!" He threw
himself down before her and pressed his face against her knees. She
caressed the thick, grizzled hair. He stood up and then stumbled away
from her, more blind than she, out of the house into the gathering
night.




CHAPTER VI


In the big, rudely carved chair Sylvie leaned back her head and pressed
her hands to her unseeing eyes. She was not sorry that Hugh had left
her, for she was oppressed and unnerved by her own emotions. Until he
had kissed her hair, she had not known that she loved him--or rather
loved an invisible presence that had enveloped her in an atmosphere of
sympathy, of protection, that had painted itself, so to speak, in heroic
colors and proportions against her darkness, that had revealed both
strength and tenderness in touch and movement, and warm, deep voice.

For until now Sylvie's life had been entirely lacking in protection and
tenderness; she had never known sympathy--her natural romanticism had
been starved. The lacks in her life Hugh had supplied the more lavishly
because he was aided, in her blindness, by the unrestricted powers of
her fancy. But now in all the fervor of this, Sylvie felt, also for
the first time, the full bitterness of her blindness. If she could see
him--if only once! If she could see him!

And there came to Sylvie unreasonably, disconnectedly, a keen memory of
Pete's embrace when he had caught her up from falling on the hearth.
A boy of fourteen? Strange that he should be so strong, that his heart
should beat so loud, that his arms should draw themselves so closely, so
powerfully about her. What were they really like, these people who
moved unseen around her and who exerted such great power over her sudden
helplessness?

She got up and began to walk to and fro restlessly, gropingly across the
room. She wished now that Hugh would come back. He had been with her so
constantly that she had grown utterly dependent upon him. The dense red
fog that lay so thick about her, frightened her when Hugh was not
there to keep her mind busy with his talk to paint pictures for her, to
command her with his magnetic presence. She stood still and strained her
eyes. She _must_ see again. If she tried hard, the red fog would surely
lift. Happiness, and her new love, they would be strong enough to dispel
the mist. There--already it was a shade lighter! She almost thought that
she could make out the brightness of the fire. She went toward it and
sat down on the bear-skin, holding out her tremulous, excited hands. And
with a sudden impulse toward confidence she called: "Pete, O Pete! Come
here a moment, please."

He came, and she beckoned to him with a gesture and an upward, vaguely
directed smile, to sit beside her. She was aware of the rigid reserve of
his body holding itself at a distance.

"Pete," she said wistfully, "what can I do to make you love me?"

He uttered a queer, sharp sound, but said nothing.

"Are you jealous?"

"No, Sylvie," he muttered.

"Oh, how I wish I could see you, Pete! I know then I'd understand
you better. Pete, try to be a little more--more human. Tell me
about yourself. Haven't you a bit of fondness for me? You see, I
want--Pete--some day perhaps I'll be your sister--"

"Then he has asked you to marry him?"

He was usually so quiet that she was startled at this new tone.

"Don't," she said. "Hush! We have only just found out. He went away
because he couldn't bear his own happiness. Pete--" She felt for him and
her hand touched his cheek. "Oh, Pete, your face is wet. You're crying."

"No, I'm not," he denied evenly. "It was melting from the roof when I
came in."

She sighed. "You are so strange, Pete. Will you let me kiss you
now--since you are going to be my big little brother?"

"I can't," he whispered. "I can't."

She laughed and crooked her arm about his neck, forcing his face down to
hers. His lips were hard and cool.

The face that Sylvie imagined a boy's face, shy and blushing, half
frightened, half cross, perhaps a trifle pleased, was so white and
patient a face in its misery that her blind tenderness seemed almost
like an intentional cruelty. It was an intensity of feeling almost
palpable, but Sylvie's mouth remained unburnt, though it removed itself
with a pathetic little twist of disappointment.

"You don't need to say anything," she said, "You've shown me how you
feel. You can't like me. You are sorry I came. And I want so dreadfully
for some one just now to talk to--to help me, to understand. It's all
dark and wonderful and frightening. I wish I had a brother--"

She bent her face to her knees and began to cry simply and passionately.
At that Pete found it easy to forget himself. He put his arm very
carefully about her, laying one of his hands on her bent head and
stroking her hair.

"You have a brother," he said. "Right here."

The dark small silken head shook. "No. You don't like me."

"I do--I do. Please tell me everything you feel like telling; I'd like
awfully to help you, to understand, to listen to you. You see, you've
been so much with Hugh, I haven't had a chance to know you as he does.
And I guess--well--maybe I'm sort of shy."

She lifted her head at that, took his stroking hand and held it in both
of hers under her chin, as a little girl holds her pet kitten for the
pleasure of its warmth. "You must get over being shy with me, Pete. We
both love Hugh; we both admire him so. I'd so love to talk to you about
him--"

"Then do, Sylvie."

"I've never seen him," she sighed, "and you can see him all day long,
Pete; will you try your best now to describe Hugh to me--every bit
of him? Tell me the color of his eyes and the shape of his face
and--everything. Tell me all you remember about him always."

"I--I'm no good at that, Sylvie. A fellow you see all day long--why, you
don't know what he looks like, 'specially if he's your own brother."

"Well, you certainly know the color of his eyes."

"He has hazel eyes--I think you'd call them--"

"Yes?" she drank in his words eagerly, pressing his hand tighter in her
excitement. "Go on. If only you were a girl, now, you'd do this so much
better."

"I--I--but I don't know what else to say, Sylvie. He is very strong."

"Of course. I know that. Didn't he pick me up out of the snow and carry
me home? He moved as though he had a feather on his arm. You are very
strong too, Pete--_very_ strong. Are _your_ eyes hazel?"

"No; blue."

"I always liked blue eyes. I like to imagine that Hugh is just the
Viking sort of man I dreamed about when I was a little girl. You think
I'm a silly goose, don't you?"

"Yes, rather."

"Don't keep trying to pull your hand away, dear; you can't guess how it
comforts me. I'm awfully alone here, and strange. I don't suppose you
know how queer and frightening it's been--this getting lost and being
brought here in the dark, and then--living on in the dark, just trusting
my instincts, my intuitions, instead of my eyes. Voices tell a lot about
people, don't they?--more than I ever dreamed they could. Pete, there is
nothing in that--that splendid, generous thing Hugh did, the thing I
am not to talk about, nothing to keep Hugh now from going back to
the world--some place--that is, far away from where it happened--and
beginning again, is there?"

"I hope not, Sylvie."

She sighed. "Of course it was wonderful. If he hadn't told me of it, I
never should have known half of his greatness; yet I can't help wishing
he were free. It's sad to think there will always be the memory of that
dreadful suffering and danger in his life."

"Very sad," said Pete.

"How alone we both are--he and I! Bella, and you, Pete--don't be angry,
please--I don't think you quite understand Hugh, quite appreciate him."

"Perhaps not."

"He has always been lonely. You are so young, and Bella is so
stupid--stupid and cross."

"No, she isn't, Sylvie. I know Bella a lot better than you do. She's not
stupid or cross--"

"Well, I like you to stick up for your old nurse. She certainly must
have loved you a lot to bring you way out here and to stay here all
these years to take care of you. I wonder where she'll go and what
she'll do when Hugh and I get married. You're too old for a nurse
now, Pete. Do you mind if I lean back against you that way? It's so
comfortable. I'd be happier without Bella, Pete, you know."

"Would you, Sylvie? Well, Bella and I will have to go away together
somewhere, I guess."

"I didn't say you, dear. I love you a lot--next best to Hugh. There's
something awfully sweet about you--you great strong overgrown thing!
Your heart goes _thump-thump-thump-thump_, as though it was as big as
the sun.... I feel much better and happier now. Things have got steady
again. Only--I wish Hugh would come back."

Pete gave a strangled sigh.

"He'll be back." And he began to draw himself away from her. "I think I
hear him now, Sylvie."

"Stay where you are," she laughed. "Don't be ashamed of being found with
a sister leaning against you and holding your hand. Are you afraid of
Hugh? I think sometimes he's rather hard with you--I'll have to speak
to him about that. Oh"--in a sudden ecstasy--"how happy I am! I feel as
light as the air. I want every one to be happy. Tell me when Hugh comes
in how happy he looks, Pete--promise me, quick! There he is at the door
now."

"Yes," he whispered, "I promise. Let me go, please, Sylvie."

He pulled himself away and stood up. At the instant, the door was opened
and shut quickly, stealthily. It was Hugh, breathing hard, gray with
fear.

"They're coming," he said harshly. "Pete, they're after me. Men are
coming across the flat."




CHAPTER VII


"Did they see you?" Pete demanded anxiously.

"I don't think so." Hugh was breathing fast; he had evidently fled
across the snow at top speed.

"Get in, then, quick--out of sight." Pete was already tearing up boards
above that long-waiting place of hiding. Hugh was about to step down
into it when he glanced up and saw Sylvie. She was standing as the
unseeing stand in moments of frightened bewilderment, her hands clasped,
her head turning from side to side. "Look here," whispered Hugh, still
absorbed in his own danger, "don't let them know that Sylvie just
wandered in here. Don't let them start asking her any questions; it's
too dangerous. Let her be--one of the family." He smiled maliciously.
"Let her be your wife, Pete." Then, as though that picture had fired his
love through its hint of jeopardy, he held out both arms suddenly: "Come
here, Sylvie--lead her to me, Pete."

The boy obeyed. But as her uncertain arms trembled about Hugh's
shoulders Pete turned sharply away. He heard the quick, anxious murmur
of their voices:

"Hugh, dearest--are you afraid?" And his: "Trust me, little darling.
Love me." A kiss.

Then a sharp, whispered summons: "Quick, can't you, Pete? Get these
boards down."

When Pete turned, Hugh had dropped into the darkness, and Sylvie stood
flushed and with her hands over her face.

Bella had meantime been collecting the most characteristic of Hugh's
belongings--those that could not be supposed to belong to Pete--and now
thrust them down into the hiding-place. The boards were rearranged, the
rug laid evenly over them. Then the three stood staring at one another,
listening helplessly to the nearing sounds.

"Oh, Pete," Sylvie gasped, "tell me what I must do--or what I ought to
say."

"Tell them," said Bella, "what Hugh told you--that you are Pete's wife.
They'll be looking for a different household from that, and it will help
to put them off."

"But--but Pete won't look old enough."

"Yes, he will. He looks older than you," Bella declared harshly. "You
sit down and keep quiet; that's the best you can do; and for God's sake
don't look so scared. There's a grave outside to show them, and nobody
digs up a six-year-old grave. They won't find Hugh. Nobody's ever
seen him. Don't shake so, Sylvie. They may not even be after him; this
country has sheltered other outlaws, you know. Hush! I hear them. I'll
be in the kitchen. Pete, be taking off your outdoor clothes. They'll
have seen Hugh's tracks even if they haven't seen him, so somebody's
got to have just come in. Be whistling and talking, natural and calm.
Remember we're all at home, just quiet and happy--no reason to be
afraid. That's it."

Through her darkness Sylvie heard the knocking and Pete's opening of
the door, the scraping of snow, the questions, the simplicity of Pete's
replies.

Then she was made known. "My wife, gentlemen!" And a moment later: "My
mother!" And she heard Bella's greeting, loud and cheerful like that
of a woman who is glad to see a visitor. Chairs were drawn up and
cigarettes rolled and lighted. She smelt the sharp sweetness of the
smoke. There was brief talk of the weather; Sylvie felt that while
they talked, the two strangers searched the place and the faces of its
inmates with cold, keen, suspicious eyes. She was grateful now for her
blindness. There came a sharp statement:

"We're looking for Ham Rutherford, the murderer." Sylvie's heart
contracted in her breast.

"Well, sir," laughed Pete, in his most boyish, light-hearted fashion,
"that sounds interesting. But it's a new name to me."

"It's an old case, however," said the man, the man who spoke more like
an Easterner than the sheriff. "Fifteen years old! They've dug it up
again back East. The daughter of the man that was killed came into some
money and thinks she can't spend it any better than in hunting down her
father's murderer. Now, we've traced Rutherford to this country, and
pretty close to this spot. He made a getaway before trial, and he came
out here fifteen years ago. About two years later he sent back East for
his kid brother--he'd be about your age now, Mr.--what you say your name
was?--Garth, Peter Garth. You'll have to excuse the sheriff; he's bound
to search your place." Sylvie had heard the footsteps going through
the three rooms. "A woman named Bertha Scrane, a distant cousin of
Rutherford's to whom he'd been kind, brought the child out. Now,
Missis--what's your name?"

"Bella Garth," she said tranquilly. "I came out here with my husband,
who died six years ago. He's buried out there under the snow. I've lived
here with my son and my son's wife."

"Yes. It's not the household we'd been expecting to find. It's a lonely
place, Missis." He looked at Sylvie. "I should think you'd prefer going
to some town."

"We're used to it here now," Bella answered.

"How'd your husband happen here, ma'am?"

"His health was poor; he'd heard of this climate, and he wanted to try
trapping. He got on first-rate until the illness came so bad on him, and
Pete's done well ever since. We haven't suffered any."

"No, I guess not. You don't look like you'd suffered."

The talk went on, an awkward, half-disguised cross-questioning as
to Bella's birthplace, her life before she came out, her husband's
antecedents. She was extraordinarily calm, ready and reasonable with her
replies.

"Well, sir"--the sheriff strolled back into the room--"I reckon these
aren't the parties we're after. But look a-here, this is a description
of Ham Rutherford. Likely you might have had a glimpse of him since you
came into the country. When he made his getaway he was about thirty-two,
height five feet eight, ugly, black-haired, noticeable eyes, manner
violent. He was deformed, one leg shorter, one shoulder higher than the
other, mouth twisted, and a scar across the nose. He'd been hurt in a
fire when he was a child--"

Sylvie broke into a spontaneous ripple of mirth, the full measure of her
relief. "Goodness," she said with utter spontaneity. "There's certainly
never been a monster like that in this house, has there, Pete?"

It did more than all that had gone before to convince the inquisitors.
From that minute there was a distinct relaxation; the evening, indeed,
turned to one of sociability.

"We hate to inconvenience you, ma'am, but it seems like at this distance
from town we've got to ask you for supper and a place to sleep."

If it had not been for the thought of Hugh in hiding, that supper and
the evening about the hearth would have been to Sylvie a pleasant one.
The men, apparently laying aside all suspicion, were entertaining;
their adventurous lives had bristled with exciting, moving, humorous
experience. It was Sylvie herself, prompted by curiosity, believing
as she did that the monster the sheriff had described bore no possible
resemblance to the man she loved, who asked suddenly:

"Do tell us about the man you're hunting for now--this Rutherford? Tell
us about what he did."

The Easterner gave her a look, and Bella, seeing it, chimed in: "Yes,
sure. Tell us about his crime."

Pete stood up and rolled another cigarette. Try as he might to steady
his fingers, they trembled. He had never heard Hugh's story. He did
not want to hear it. The very name of Rutherford that had, in what now
seemed to him another age, belonged to Hugh and to him was terrible
in his ears. A sickness of dread seized him. Fortunately the eyes of
neither of the men were upon him. Sylvie had their whole attention.

The detective spoke. "He was a storekeeper back in a university town,
way East, where I came from. He kept a bookshop and had a heap of
book-learning. I remember him myself, though I was a youngster. He was a
wonderful, astonishing sort of chap, though as ugly as the devil; had a
great gift of narration, never told the truth in his life, I guess, but
that only made him all the more entertaining. And he had a temper--phew!
Redhot! He'd fly out and storm and strike in all directions. That's
what did for him. Some fool quarrel about a book it was, and the man,
a frequenter of the shop, a scholar, a scientist, professor at the
university, accused Rutherford of lying. Rutherford had a heavy brass
paper-cutter in his hand. The professor had a nasty tongue in his head.
Well, a tongue's no match for a paper-cutter. The professor said too
much, called Rutherford a hump-backed liar and got a clip on the head
that did for him."

"It's an ugly story," said Sylvie. Bella and Pete retained their
silence.

"Murder ain't pretty telling, as a general thing," remarked the sheriff.

"No, though I've heard of cases where a man was justified in killing
another man--I mean to save some one he loved from dreadful suffering,"
Sylvie replied.

"Well, ma'am, I don't know about that. I've read stories that make it
look that way, but in all my experience, it's the cowards and the fools
that kill, and they do it because they're lower down, closer to the
beast, or perhaps to an uncontrolled child, than most of us."

"But there was a time," Bella said, with a smothered passion, "when an
insult to a gentleman's honor had to be avenged."

"Yes, ma'am," drawled the sheriff, "in them history days things was
fixed up to excuse animal doin's, kind of neater and easier and more
becomin' than they are now. Well, Mr. Garth, can we have our beds? We've
kept these ladies up talkin' long enough. Your mother looks plum wore
out."

They slept in the bed usually shared by Pete and Hugh. Pete lay on the
floor in the living-room not far from his brother's hiding-place--lay
there rigid and feverish, staring at the night. Sylvie, at Bella's side,
slept no better. Her imagination went over and over the story of Ham
Rutherford's crime. She saw the little dark bookshop, the professor's
thin, sneering face, the hideous anger of the cripple, the blow, the
dead body, Rutherford's arrest. And when her brain was sick, it would
turn for relief to the noble story of Hugh's self-sacrifice, only to be
balked by a sense of unreality. What the detective had told, briefly
and dryly, lived in her mind convincingly; but Hugh's romance, that had
glowed on his tongue, now lay lifeless on her fancy. Back her mind would
go to the bookshop, the gibing professor, the heavy paper-cutter.

In the dawn she heard Bella get up with a deep-shaken sigh and go about
her preparations for breakfast. But it was noon before the two men left.




CHAPTER VIII


Hugh came up from his hiding-place like a man risen from the dead. They
helped him to his chair before the fire; they poured coffee down him,
rubbed his blue, stiff hands. He sat looking up pitifully, his eyes
turning from one to the other of them like those of a beaten hound. All
the masterfulness, all the bombast, had been crushed out of him; even
the splendor of his flaring hazel eyes was dimmed--they were hollow,
hopeless, old. For a long time he did not speak, only drank the coffee
and submitted himself meekly to their ministrations; then at last he
touched Sylvie with a trembling hand.

"Sylvie," he whispered brokenly.

"Hugh, dear, you're safe now; please speak; please laugh; you frighten
me more than anything--why is he so silent, Pete? Bella, tell me what's
wrong?"

"He's been crouching there on the damp, cold ground for hours," said
Bella, "not knowing what might happen." Her voice trembled; she passed a
hand as shaking as her voice across Hugh's bent head. "You're safe now.
You're safe now," she murmured.

Hugh's teeth chattered, and he bent closer to the fire.

"Ugh--it was cold down there," he said, "like a grave! Sylvie, come
here." Just an echo of his old imperious fashion it was--though the
look was that of a beggar for alms. "Give me those warm little hands of
yours." She knelt close to him, rubbed his hands in hers, looking up at
Pete with a tremulous mouth that asked for advice.

"He'll be all right in a minute," said Pete. "You talk to him, Sylvie."

"Yes, you talk--you talk. Do you remember how I talked to you when you
were afraid of the bears--ah!" He drew her head savagely against his
breast, folded his arms about it, stroked the hair. "Sylvie! Is it all
right? Can it be--the same?"

"Yes, yes, why not?"

"Were you frightened?"

"Not after the first. After they had described you, I knew that they
were looking for the wrong man, and then I felt all right. I didn't
know--poor Hugh!--how cold and cramped you were. What a shame that you
took a false alarm and hid yourself! I don't believe there would have
been a bit of danger if you'd stayed out. They'd never even heard of
you, I suppose."

Her talk, so gay, so strangely at cross-purposes with reality, was like
a vivifying wine to him. The color came back into his face; a wild sort
of relief lighted his eyes.

"Then it didn't occur to you, Sylvie, that that brute might have been
me--that the men might, after all, have been describing me--eh?" he
asked, risking all his hope on one throw.

She laughed, and, lifting herself a little in his arms, touched her soft
mouth to his. "But, Hugh, you told me your story, don't you remember?
And it is gloriously, mercifully different from Rutherford's."

He put his chin on his fist and stared over her head into the fire.
She felt the slackening of his embrace and searched his arms with
questioning fingers. "Why are you cross, Hugh? Did I say anything to
hurt you? Let's forget Ham Rutherford. I wonder where he is, poor,
horrible wretch!"

"Dead--dead--dead," Hugh muttered. "Dead and buried--or he ought to be.
O God!" he groaned, and crushed her close against him; "I can't ask you
to love me, Sylvie--to marry me. Now you know what it is like to love a
man who must be afraid of other men. What right have I to ask any woman
to share my life?"

"But, Hugh--if I love you?"

"And you do love me?" he asked.

"Yes."

He laughed out at that, stood up, drawing her to stand beside him.
"Bella--Pete," he called, "do you hear--you two?" He beckoned them
close, laid a hand on them, drew first one, then the other toward
Sylvie. "She loves me. She sees me as I am!" Suddenly he put his
grizzled head on Sylvie's shoulder and wept. She felt her way back to
the chair, sat down, and drew him to kneel with his arms about her, her
head bent over him, her small hands caressing him. She looked at Pete
for help, for explanations, but she could not see his pale, tormented
face.

After a while Hugh was calm and sat at her feet, smoking. But he was
unnaturally silent, and his eyes brooded upon her haggardly.

It was several days before Hugh regained his old vigor and buoyancy;
then it came to life like an Antaeus flung down to mother earth. His
hour of doubt, of self-distrust, of compunction, was whirled away like
an uprooted tree on the flood of his happiness. He flung reason and
caution to the four winds; he dared Bella or Pete to betray him, he
played his heroic part with boisterous energy; his tongue wagged like a
tipsy troubadour's. What an empty canvas, a palette piled with rainbow
tints, a fistful of clean brushes would be to an artist long starved for
his tools, such was Sylvie's mind to Hugh. She was darkness for him to
scrawl upon with light; she was the romantic ear to his romantic tongue;
she was the poet reader for his gorgeous imagery. He had not only the
happiness of the successful lover, but even more, the happiness of the
successful creator. What he was creating was the Hugh that might have
been.

With Sylvie clinging to his hand, he now went out singing--the three of
them together, great Hugh and happy artist Hugh all but welded into
one man for her and for her love. Those were splendid days, days of
fantastic happiness. Hugh's joy, his sense of freedom, gave him a
tenfold gift of fascination.

Yet one day--one of those dim, moist spring days more colorful to Hugh's
heart than any of his days--there cut into his consciousness like a
hard, thin edge, a sense of a little growing change in Sylvie. It had
been there--the change,--slightly, dimly there, ever since the sheriff's
visit. It was not that she doubted Hugh--such a suspicion would have
struck him instantly aware and awake--but that she had become in some
way uncertain of herself, restless, depressed, afraid. And it was always
his love-making that brought the reaction, a curious, delicate, inner
recoil, so delicate and slight, so deep beneath the threshold of her
consciousness, that in the blind glory of his self-intoxication he
missed it altogether--might, indeed, have gone on missing it, as she
would have gone on ignoring or repressing it, if it had not been for
their kiss on the mountain-top.

This was one of Hugh's madnesses; he would take Sylvie up a mountain and
show her his kingdom, show her himself as lord of the wilderness. He had
been there before many times, to the top of their one mountain, always
under protest from Bella and Pete. It was a bare rock exposed to half
the world and all the eyes of Heaven; and for a man in hiding, a man who
lived, yet whose name was carved above a grave, it was a very target for
untoward accident. Some trader or trapper down in the forest might look
up and behold the misshapen figure black and bold, against the sky.
Yet there was never so mighty a Hugh as when he stood there defiant and
alone. Now he wanted Sylvie to sense that tragic magnificence.

So they went out, Hugh's arm about her, as strange a pair of lovers as
ever tempted the spring--the great, scarred, uncouth, gray cripple and
the slim, unseeing girl, groping and clinging, absolutely shut off from
any contact with reality as long as this man should interpret creation
for her. Sylvie turned back to wave at Pete, whom they had left standing
in the doorway.

"I'll be hunting for you if you stay out late," he called--to which Hugh
shouted back: "You hunting for us! Don't fancy I can't take care of this
child, myself."

"Both of them blind!" Pete muttered to himself in answer.

They were moving rather slowly across the rough, sagebrush-covered flat,
and presently Hugh led Sylvie into the fragrant silence of the forest
trail. To her it was all scent and sound. Hugh whispered to her what
this drumming meant and that chattering and that sudden rattle almost
under their feet.

They had to go slowly, Sylvie touching the trees here and there, along
her side of the trail. He lifted her over logs and fallen trees, and
sometimes, before he set her down, he kissed her. Then Sylvie would turn
her head shyly, and he would laugh. Thus they made slow, sweet progress.

"I see more in the woods with your eyes than I ever could with my own,"
she told him.

"I have eyes for us both," he answered. "That's why God gave me the eyes
I have, because He knew the use I'd be making of them."

"Is this the trail Pete follows to the trading-station?" she asked. "I
wish you could take me there, Hugh, or--would you let him take me?"

He tightened his arm. "I can't bear to have you out of my sight," he
answered.

She sighed. "It seems so queer that they haven't tried to find me. Do
you suppose they think that I'm dead? Did Pete mail my letter to Miss
Foby, I wonder?"

"What does Miss Foby matter?" he asked jealously. "What does anything
matter to you but--me? Here we leave Pete's trail and I take you
straight up the mountain, dear one. We'll rest now and then; when we get
to the rocky place just below the top, I'll carry you. Are you happy?
I always feel as if my heart melted with the snow when spring comes--a
wild, free, tumbling feeling of softness and escape."

She sighed. "Yes--if only I could see. I miss my eyes out of doors more
than in the house. Does snow-blindness really last so long? Perhaps it
was the nervous shock and the exhaustion as much as the glare. I am sure
it all will just go suddenly some day. I stare and stare sometimes, and
I feel as if I might see--almost."

He frowned. "You mustn't miss anything when you have me, Sylvie. Do you
suppose I miss anything, now that I have you? My career, my old friends,
my old life, my liberty, the world? That for everything!" He snapped his
fingers. "If only I have you."

"You love me so much," she answered, as though she were oppressed, "it
frightens me sometimes."

"When you are wholly mine--" he began. "Well, wait till we get to the
top of the mountain; there I'll tell you all my plans. They're as big
and beautiful as the world. I feel, with your love, that I can move
mountains. I can fashion the world close to my heart's desire. We'll
leave this blank spot and go to some lovely, warm, smiling land where
the water is turquoise and the sky aquamarine--"

"And perhaps my sight will come back." It was almost a prayer.

He did not answer. They had come to a sharp sudden ascent. He took her
in his arms, scrambled across the tumbled rocks, and set her down beside
him on the great granite crest that rose like the edge of a gray wave.
The clean, wild wind smote her and shook her and pressed back her hair
and dress. She clung to him.

"Is it steep? Are we on the edge of a cliff, Hugh? I'm not afraid!"

"We're on the very top of the world," he told her breathlessly, his
voice filled with a sense of awe, "our world, Sylvie, I'm master here.
There's no greater mind than my own in all that dark green circle. It's
pines, pines, pines to the edge of the earth, Sylvie, an ocean of purple
and green--silver where the wind moves, treading down, like Christ
walking on the water. And the sky is all gray, like stone."

"Can you see the flat, the cabin?"

"The flat, yes--a round green spot, way down there behind us. The cabin?
No. That's in a hollow, you may be sure, well out of sight. I'm an
outlaw, dearest, remember. There's a curve of the river, like a silver
elbow. And Sylvie, up above us, an eagle is turning and turning in a
huge circle. He thinks he's king. But, Sylvie, it's our world--yours and
mine. This is our marriage."

She drew back. "What do you mean?"

"Haven't you a feeling for such images? We'll go before a parson--don't
be afraid. Would I frighten you, Sylvie? I love you too much for that.
Why, Sylvie, what's wrong?"

When his lips, clinging and compelling, had left hers, she bent her face
to his arm and began to cry.

"Oh, I don't know. I don't know.... But please don't kiss me like that,
not like that!"

He released her and half turned, but her hands instantly hunted for him,
found him and clung.

"Hugh, don't be angry. Be patient with me. Try to understand. Perhaps
it's because I am in the dark. I do love you. I do. But you must wait.
Soon it will be spring for me, too. You don't understand? You're angry?
But I can't explain it any better."

"You can lay your hand on me," he said hoarsely. "God knows I'm real
enough." And he thought so! "My love for you is here like a granite
block, Sylvie."

"I know. It is the one thing in the darkness that is real. I know
you--your love, splendid and strong and brave. Wait just a little, Hugh.
Try to be patient. Suddenly it will all come right. The fog will lift.
Then we'll really be on top of the mountain." She laughed, but rather
sadly.

"I will always hate this mountain-top," he said. "I used to love it. I
was so close to happiness, and now you've snatched it out of my reach."
He drew in sobbing breaths.

"No--it's myself I'm keeping from happiness, not you," she answered.
"I know it will come right, but you must not hurry me. Dear Hugh, be
patient." She found his hand and raised it, a dead weight, to her lips.
"Please be patient. Let's go down out of this wind. I can't see your
world, and I'm cold."

So, in silence--a dull gray silence Hugh led her down into the valley.




CHAPTER IX


They came down the hill rapidly and carelessly. Hugh, stung by pain and
anger, threw himself over the rocks, and Sylvie was too proud to show
her timidity or to ask for help. She crept and climbed up and down,
saving herself with groping hand, letting one foot test the distances
before she put the other down. At last the rattle of his progress
sounded so far below that she quavered: "Aren't you going to wait for
me, Hugh?"

He stopped short, and for a moment watched her silently; then, smitten
by the pathos of her progress--a little child, she seemed, against the
mountain toppling so close behind her--he came swinging up to her and
gave her his hand.

"You _need_ me, anyway, don't you?" he asked with a tender sort of
roughness.

She couldn't answer because she didn't want him to know that he had
made her cry. She kept her face turned from him and hurried along at his
side.

"Why do you go so fearfully fast?" she was forced at last to protest.

"Because I want to get down from this accursed mountain. I want to get
down into the woods again where I was happy."

"Hugh"--she pulled at his arm--"you are only a child after all."

"Perhaps."

"Well--" She stopped. "Go home alone, then. I'll be no worse off than
when you found me the first time. Pete will come out and hunt for me.
He has a far sweeter temper than you, Hugh, and doesn't think only of
himself."

He swung away at that, resting his hand against a big rock to clear
a hole; then, seeing her about to step down into it, he pivoted back,
caught her up bodily in his arms, and, laughing, ran with her down the
hill, bounding over the rocks, leaping over the crevices, while she
clung to him in fright.

"You silly child!" he cried. "This is the way I'll take you home. Now
I've got you, and I'll punish you well, too." She clung to him and
begged him to stop. She was frightened by their rash, plunging progress,
by his speech. She struggled. "Let me down. I won't be carried like this
against my will. Hugh, let me down!"

"All right!" He fairly flung her from him on a grassy spot. He was about
to leave her when a rushing rattle sounded above them. The boulder
he had twice used to turn his own weight upon was charging down the
hillside! Just in time he caught Sylvie, threw her to one side and fell
prone, helpless, in the path of the slide. He cried out, flinging up his
arm, and, as though his cry had been of magic, the boulder faltered and
stopped. A root half buried just above his body had made a hollow and a
ledge; it had rocked the rolling fragment back up on its haunches, so to
speak, and balanced it to a stop.

"Hugh! Hugh!" sobbed Sylvie. "What was it? Are you hurt?"

She crept up to him.

"No," Hugh told her, breathing heavily. "It was a rolling rock."

"How did you stop it? You must be hurt, crushed, bruised."

"My arm's wrenched--not badly." He had in fact wrenched it slightly.

"Your poor arm! You were so quick, so strong. You didn't think of your
own life. And I've been so cruel. Hugh, Hugh, kiss me."

Hugh took his reward, none the less sweet to his strange nature, in that
it was only potentially earned. And joy, like a warm flood, crept up
again to his heart. He sat on the hillside and held his small love
close. One of his arms moved stiffly, and he groaned a little. She
rubbed it for him.

"You'd better come home and let Bella and me fix it. It may be badly
hurt. You're sure it isn't broken?" she asked.

"Quite sure."

"Lean on me! I'll help you down. You can tell me where to step."

"Nonsense," he laughed, his very blood singing warm with relief. "A
strained arm won't hurt my walking apparatus. We had a lover's quarrel,
didn't we? And the boulder was peacemaker. Bless the boulder!"

"Don't joke, dear. You saved my life at the risk of your own. Are
you always doing insane, generous, dangerous things? Think if you had
been--" She shivered.

"Do you suppose my life is worth anything to me without yours, Sylvie?"
He bent his head and kissed her again, but he had learned his lesson,
and there was restraint and timidity in that kiss.

"The sun's come out," cried Sylvie.

"Yes, it's splendidly bright. There's a clean slit in the sky; there at
the western edge the dark gray cap is being lifted inch by inch, the way
a boy lifts his cap to see the butterfly he's caught. All's gold behind
it, Sylvie, burning gold. The rocks are like bright copper. And the
pines, they're incandescent, phosphorescent green--"

"If I could only see it!"

Down near the pines a tall, still figure stood watching them. It was
Pete, and his smile, usually so frank and sweet, had now a sardonic
twist. As they came down out of their sun into his shadow, he spoke with
a drag to his syllables.

"Hullo," he said. "That was a narrow escape you had, you two!"

The voice might have been a pistol-shot for the start it gave to Hugh.

"Why, it's Pete. We must be late, Pete," Sylvie called joyously. "Did
you see how Hugh saved my life? He threw himself down before the rock
and stopped it. He's hurt his poor arm. The great stone was right on top
of us, and he threw me out of the way and set his own strength against
it. I couldn't see the rock, Pete, but it felt like a mountain."

"It was big enough to smash you both," said Pete.

He looked at Hugh, whose eyes glared in a strained, shamed face. The
older man's fingers worked nervously; he opened his lips and closed them
again. It was easy to understand the travail of his mind, unwilling
to forego the imaginary bit of heroism, and yet abashed by the boy's
awareness of the lie.

Pete gave one short laugh; then, springing suddenly across a fallen tree
that separated them, he caught Sylvie up into his arms.

"You can't carry her with a wrenched arm," he said, half gayly, half
tauntingly, "and at the best rate she can go, it will be night before we
get her home. I'm strong. I'll carry her myself."

Sylvie laughed protesting that she was being treated like a doll, and
resigned herself to Pete's swift, smooth stride. It was as though she
were skimming through space, so quietly did his moccasined feet press
the pine-needled earth, so exquisitely did his young strength save her
from any jar. He whistled softly through his teeth as he ran in long,
swift strides. And as he did not speak to her, she lay silent, yet
strangely peaceful and happy. Hugh was left far behind. The forest
fragrance moved cool and resinous against her face.

"I feel as if we could go on and on forever," she said with a sigh,
"forever and ever and ever."

"We will," he answered through his teeth, hardly pausing in his
whistling for the odd reply. "We will."

But for all that, he set her gently and suddenly down, and she knew that
she stood again at the cabin door.

"Pete, where are you?" she asked.

But he had disappeared, still in utter silence, like a genie whose task
is done.




CHAPTER X


"What did he say to you? What did he say to you?" asked Hugh again and
again.

Sylvie laughed at him.

"He didn't say anything--hardly a word, except that he pretended he was
going on forever. He said: 'We will, we will.' That's absolutely all,
Hugh. Don't be so silly. What _could_ he say?"

"I don't know," Hugh answered. "He might have made fun of me."

"Fun of you! After saving my life! I'd have boxed his ears! No, no,
Peter wouldn't do that. He's afraid of me."

She was so proud of this that Hugh, perforce, laughed. It was after
supper, and they had walked a little way from the cabin. They were
standing just above the river on a little hillock topped with three big
pines. The dusk was thick about them; stars pricked the soft sky. Sylvie
was wrapped in Hugh's coat, and they were linked by their hands hanging
at their sides. Every one but Sylvie had been very silent at supper, but
she had told her story of Hugh's heroism again and again until finally
even Hugh had grumbled at "the fuss."

"What makes you think anyone could be afraid of you?" He smiled down at
the small dark head which did not reach his shoulder.

"He's afraid I'll kiss him. Don't grip my hand that way; it hurts. You
couldn't be jealous of a boy! Besides, I _don't_ kiss him any more. I
never have kissed him but that once--no, twice, when I told him that I
was going to be his sister."

"You told him that?" Hugh's voice had an odd anxiety. "How did he take
it?"

"I don't think he was very enthusiastic. He loves you so much, Hugh; you
are the very heart of his universe, and I suppose he is jealous of your
love for me. Since then he's avoided me and is as dumb as a fish when I
talk to him. I think his body has outgrown his mind, Hugh."

"Perhaps. I don't know," he answered.

"And Bella is so silent, too. Hugh, it must have been a lonely life for
you before I came. Those two people, though they love you so much, are
not companionable. I think, Hugh, that they aren't able to understand
you. You are so brilliant, and they are so dull; you are so articulate,
and they are so dumb; you are so warm, so quick to see, to feel, to
sympathize, while they are so slow and so cold. Dear Hugh, I'm glad I
came. I am stupid myself, but I have enough intelligence to understand
you--a little, haven't I, dear?"

"So much more than enough!" The low speech with its tremor of humility
was almost lost.

"What a noise the river makes!" he said presently.

"Yes. And the pines. The whole air is full of rushing and sighing and
clapping and rattling. Sounds tell me so much now. They fill my whole
life. It is very queer. Why, a voice means more to me now, I think, than
a face ever did.... Is it a deep river, Hugh?"

"Now it is--deep and dangerous. But it goes down very quickly when the
snow at its source has melted. In summer it is a friendly little brook,
and in the fall a mere trickle that hardly wets your shoe. I have a boat
here tied to the root of one of these trees, a boat I made myself, to
pole across when the stream is too deep for wading. I'll take you out in
it when the flood's down; it wouldn't last fifteen minutes now. In
the spring, Sylvie, a nymph comes down from the mountain, a wild white
nymph. She has ice-green hair and frost-white arms; you can see her
lashing the water, and if you listen, you can hear her sing and cry.
Let's go in, dear; you're tired and cold--I can feel you shivering.
We'll start a big fire, and I'll tell you how that nymph caught me
once and nearly strangled me with her cold, wet arms. I was trying to
save--you'll laugh when I tell you about it--a baby bear."

Pete and Bella made room for them silently about the hearth where Pete
had already built up a fire. Sylvie groped her way to the throne from
which the other woman slipped half furtively and so noiselessly that
Sylvie never guessed her usurpation.

"Hugh is going to tell us a story," she said, and rested her head back
so that her small chin pointed out and her slim neck was drawn up--"a
wonderful story about the river and a bear. I hope it's a baby bear,
Hugh, for you know how I feel about bears. I honestly think that being
so afraid of seeing them is what made me blind!" She gave her small, shy
laugh. "I thought I saw them everywhere I looked that day and night. It
seems so long ago now, and yet it is not so many weeks. I can still hear
Hugh's voice calling out to me across the snow. And now," she said, "the
snow's all gone and none of you are strangers any more, and--Go on with
your story, Hugh."

Pete added a log to the fire so that the flames stretched up bravely
and made a great fan of light against which they all seemed painted
like ornamental figures, Hugh lounging along the rug to make a striking
central figure. Bella was drawn up rigidly on a stiff, hard chair; she
hemmed a long, coarse towel with her blunt, work-roughened fingers.

Pete sat opposite Sylvie on the floor, his back against the corner of
the fireplace, his knees drawn up in his hands, his head a little bent.
He too--from under his long level brows--looked for the most part at
Hugh, not devotedly, not wistfully, but with a somber wondering. It was
only now and then, and as though he couldn't help it, that the blue,
smouldering Northern eyes were turned to Sylvie on her throne. Then they
would brighten painfully, and his lips would tighten so that the dimple,
meant for laughter, cut itself like a touch of pain into his cheek. The
firelight heightened his picturesqueness--the dull blue of his shirt,
open at the round, smooth throat, the dark gold-brown of his corduroy
trousers, against which the long, tanned hands, knit strongly together,
stood out in the rosy, leaping light--beautifully painted against the
background of old brown logs.

Yet it was Hugh, after all, who dominated the room by right of his
power, his magnetism, the very distortion of his spirit. Here in this
lonely square of light and warmth, surrounded by a world of savage,
lawless winds heightening the voices of vast loneliness, these three
people were imprisoned by him, a Merlin of the West.

He sat up to begin his story, pressing tobacco into his pipe. "Oh, it's
not so much of a story, Sylvie. It was last spring when the river was
high and I'd been out with my traps. I was coming home along the river
edge, pretty tired, a big load on my back. I came around a bend of the
river, and not far below me a little black bear, round as a barrel, was
trying to scramble over the flood on a very shaky log. The mother was
on the other side, but I didn't know that then. Well, there's nothing in
God's world, Sylvie, so beguiling as a baby bear. This little fellow was
scared by what he was doing, but he was bound he'd get across the river.
He'd make a few steps; then he'd back up and half rise on his hind legs.
I watched him a long time. Then he made up his mind he'd better make a
dash for it. He began scrambling like a frantic kitten, and it was just
in the most ticklish spot that he heard me and jumped and went rolling
off into the river. I tell you, my heart came right up into my mouth."

"Oh, _was_ he drowned?" wailed Sylvie.

Hugh rose and stood with his back to the fire, dominating the room even
more convincingly, with his vivid ugliness. Sylvie's face turned up to
him like a white flower to the sun it lives by, without seeing. It was
strange to watch the adoration, the worship on that small face, and at
the same time to behold the grotesqueness toward which it was directed.
Bella was listening with her lowered eyes and tightened lips. She was
interested in spite of herself; and Pete's inscrutable face followed the
story with absorption.

"Well, in he rolled with a splash and went rattling down the current,
turning over and over. Like a fool, I threw away my hides, ran down the
bank and jumped in after him--that is, I meant to hold on to a branch
and stand out in the water and catch him as he went by. But the nymph
I told you about had her own plans. She wrapped her arms round me, and
away we went, bear all. Oh, yes, I'd caught the cub all right, and he
was about half drowned by that time--no fight left in him.

"Well, for a bit it was a question whether the world wouldn't be quickly
and well rid of us both, but we tumbled up against a root and scrambled
out, and when I'd rested, I picked up limp and trembling Master Bear and
went back for my hides. And while I was collecting them, I heard a sort
of grumpy, grumbling sound, and I looked up--and, by Jove, Mother Bear
was coming across that log with the longest steps you ever saw. That's
when I ran to collect my gun--it was a little farther up the bank than
my hides, worse luck!"

Even Bella had forgotten her bitterness in listening, and Pete's parted
lips were those of an excited child. Sylvie leaned forward in her chair,
her cheeks tingling, her hands locked. Hugh had thrown himself into the
action of his story; his face was slightly contorted as though sighting
along a gun-barrel, his arm raised, the ungainliness of his deformity
strongly accentuated. He was not looking at Sylvie; true to his nature
and his habit, he had forgotten every one but that Hugh of adventure
and of romance, the one companion of his soul. None of them was watching
Sylvie, and when she gave a sharp, little cry, a queer start and then
sat utterly still, Hugh accepted it--they all accepted it--as a tribute
to his story-telling powers.

But Sylvie, leaning her elbows on her knees, raised trembling hands to
her eyes and hid them. She sat very still, very white, while the story
went on, vividly imagined, picturesquely told. When it was over, and the
mother bear, after a worthy struggle, defeated, Hugh looked about for
his applause. It came, grudgingly from Bella, eagerly from Pete--and
from Sylvie in a sudden extravagant clapping of hands, a ripple of high,
excited laughter, and a collapse in her chair. She had fainted in a limp
little heap.

She came to in an instant, but seemed bewildered and, unprotesting,
permitted herself to be carried to bed. She declared she felt quite well
again and wanted only to be alone. She repeated this moaningly. "Oh, to
be alone!"

Hugh seated himself on the end of the bed and kissed her forehead and
her hand, but it quivered under his lips and was drawn away.

He came back into the living-room with a pale, bewildered face.




CHAPTER XI


Next day there came out of that room a new Sylvie or rather a dozen new
Sylvies: a flighty witch of a Sylvie who tempted her blindness with rash
ventures about the rooms and even out of doors, who laughed at Hugh and
led him on, and drew him out to his maddest improvisations, who treated
Pete to snubs and tauntings that stung like so many little whips; and
again a Sylvie who was still and timid and a trifle furtive, who
rarely spoke, but sat with locked hands in an attitude of desperate
concentration and seemed to be planning something secret and dangerous;
and then there was a haughty, touch-me-not Sylvie; and a Sylvie who
mysteriously wept. But all of these Sylvies showed an impetuous, new
tenderness toward Bella.

"I've been all wrong about you, Bella," she confessed. "I know you're
not really old and ugly and cross at all. Let me touch your face."
Bella, awkward and flushed, had no choice but to submit to the flick of
the light, young fingers. "I'm learning the touch of the blind," Sylvie
boasted. "Now, listen--isn't this right? You have thick, straight
eyebrows and deep-set eyes; are they blue or brown, Bella, or bright
gray?"

"They're gray," said Pete.

Hugh was watching from eyes sunk in a nervous, pallid face. He had come
in from his traps in the midst of Sylvie's experiment.

"And she has a nice, straight, strong, short nose, and a mouth that she
holds too tight. Loosen your mouth, Bella; it might be very sweet if
you gave it a chance. And she has a sharp chin--not pretty, your
chin, but--look! If you'd soften your hair, pull it over your ears and
forehead--Why do you brush it back that way? It _must_ be unbecoming.
And, Bella, it's curly, or would be with a little freedom. What color is
your hair?"

"Gray--like my eyes," said Bella, scarlet now, and trying to draw
herself away.

"Is it really gray, Pete? Tell me the truth, if you can."

"Her hair is a very light brown," said Pete, flushed as scarlet now as
Bella; "sort of a grayish brown; you wouldn't notice any gray hairs,
hardly."

"Bella, I'm sure you don't look a day older than thirty-five. Your skin
feels smooth and young. Why do you let Hugh call you an old woman? Poor
Bella, I'm afraid you've spoiled those two boys?"

Sylvie turned suddenly and imperiously upon the men, and Bella made
her escape, not from the room, for she was too stirred, too full of an
excited suspense, to bring herself to leave. From a far corner, near the
window through which came the soft May wind, she watched them.

"Now, Pete," said Sylvie, "it's your turn. If I'm to learn the touch of
the blind, I must have practice. What can I make of you! Come here. Why
don't you come?" She stamped her foot. "My, but you are badly trained.
Really, Hugh, you ought to discipline him. Wait until I am your
sister-in-law."

Hugh started angrily. "Don't joke about that!" he threatened in a harsh,
sudden voice.

She turned toward him with quickness and bent her head sidelong as
though listening intently for what else he might have to say. Her lips
were set close and narrow. She had listened to him like this, almost
breathlessly, ever since her sudden faintness, listened as though she
would draw his very soul in through her ears.

He too flushed. "It's life and death to me, Sylvie," he pleaded.

"Life and death--life _or_ death," she repeated strangely. She stood,
as if turning the speech over in her mind, then gave her head a quick
little shake like a diver coming to the surface of deep water, and moved
a step toward Pete. "Are you coming, boy, or not? I want to feel your
face."

"Do as she says," Hugh commanded harshly, and Pete came slowly to her
and stood with his hands locked behind him, bending over the little
figure. She put her hands on his shoulders and gave him a shake, and
smiled.

"Such a big, strong boy! Where's your face?" It winced and paled under
her touch. His eyes fell, shifted, could not meet Hugh's, who watched
with unsteady breathing and white lips.

"Your face is as smooth as a girl's, Pete. What a wide, low forehead
and crisp, short hair; it ripples back from your temples. You must be
a pretty boy! A neat nose and a round, hard chin and--oh, Pete, Pete! I
believe you have a dimple. How absurd! A great, long dimple like a slit
in your right cheek. Why do you blink your eyes so? They're long eyes,
with thick, short lashes. What a strong, round neck! I think I like your
face."

She patted his cheek, the pat more like a smart slap. He pulled away.
"That's for disobedience. Come back. I'm not through with you. Where's
your mouth? A big, long mouth. Pete, why does your mouth tremble?" Her
hand fell from his lips, and she turned away. "Take me out for a walk,
Hugh, please," she said. "This cabin is stuffy, now that the days are
warm. I want to sit under the pines and listen to the river. You can
tell me one of your wonderful stories about yourself."

"What does it mean, Bella?" Pete asked breathlessly when Hugh had gone
out, not so much leading the girl as hurrying after her to save her from
the rashness of her impetuous progress. "What does it mean?" Pete was as
white as paper.

"I don't know." Bella came over from the window and stood by the
fireplace, rolling her arms in her apron and shaking her head. "She's a
crazy little witch. She'll drive us mad. Hugh is half mad now--have you
noticed? She won't let him touch her. And you, poor boy! Pete, why don't
you go away?"

"I've thought about it," he said. "I--I can't." He flung himself down in
Hugh's chair and rested his head in his hands.

Bella bent over him. "Poor Pete! It's cruel for you--and," she added
softly, uncertainly, "and for me."

"For you too, Bella?" He looked up at her through tears.

She nodded her head, and her face worked. "Perhaps you could take her
back to her friends, Pete?"

"And leave Hugh? Didn't you hear what he said, Bella? Life and death! It
would kill him if she should go away with me. Or--he'd follow and kill
me."

"Yes," Bella assented somberly; "yes, he'd kill you. The devil is still
living in his heart."

"No. Sylvie will marry him. Hugh gets his will." Pete shook his head.
"Wait a few days--you'll see. She's fighting against him now; I don't
know why--some instinct. But though he tells her so many lies, he
doesn't lie about one thing. He loves her. He does love her."

"No! No!" Bella's passion, tearing its way through her long habit of
repression, was almost terrifying. "He loves the image she has of him.
If he knew that she could see him as I do, his love would shrivel up
like a flower in a drought. Hugh can't love the truth. He can't love
anything but his delusions. Pete, tell her the truth. For God's sake,
tell her the truth. Give her back her eyesight. Let her know his name,
his story--his _face_!"

"Don't dare ask me, Bella!"

"Why not?" She seemed to be out of breath, like a person who has been
climbing in thin air. Her lips were dry.

"Because--well, would you do it yourself?"

"Ah! He would hate me, if I did. But you, Pete, when Sylvie loved
you--and if she knew you, she would surely love you; any woman
would--why, then you could bear Hugh's hatred. I have only him--only
him."

She locked her hands and lifted them to her forehead and was now making
blind steps toward the kitchen door.

Pete followed her, and turning her about, drew down the hands from her
face.

"Bella--_you_? Without saying a word? All these years?"

Under the first pressure of sympathy that her agony had ever known, she
could not speak. She bent her head for an instant against his arm,
then moved away from him, groping through the kitchen door, back to her
unutterable loneliness.

Pete stood staring after her. A new Bella, this, not the cousin, the
little cousin from the farm; not the nurse who had saved him from Hugh's
hardness and told him limping fairy tales and doctored his hurts; not
the accepted necessity, but a woman--a woman young, yes, young. In the
instant when he had glimpsed her face, broken and quivering, the tight
lips parted and the hair disarranged about flushed, quivering cheeks,
the eyes deep with widened pupils, she had revealed beauty and
passion--the two halves of youth. How blind, how blind Hugh had been,
blind and selfish and greedy, drinking up the woman's heart, feeding
upon her youth!




CHAPTER XII


"When you sit so silent, Pete," Sylvie said softly, "I sometimes wonder
if you're not staring at me."

"When I'm making a trap," he answered, smiling a little to himself and
instinctively shifting his gaze, "I can't very well be staring at you,
can I?"

He was kneeling on the ground before the cabin door, she sitting on the
low step under the shadow of the roof. Her chin rested on the backs of
her hands, the limber wrists bent up a little, the sleeves slipped away
from her slim, white wrists. Her face was brightly rosy, her lips very
red--at once a little stern, yet very sweet.

"Traps are cruel," she said.

"I think so myself. But we have to make a living, don't we?"

"Aren't you ashamed of yourself sometimes, Pete?"

"For making traps, and catching live things in them?"

"Yes. It's a sort of deceitful cruelty, catching the little blind,
wandering wild things."

"Blind?" he repeated blankly, then flushed.

"Yes, blind. But it wasn't only that I meant."

"What else ought I to be ashamed of?"

"Of living on your brother." He winced sharply, but she went on coolly:
"Of staying here in the wilderness. You are a big boy now. Many a boy of
your age, even smaller and weaker, has gone out in the world to make his
own way. There's no reason for _you_ to hide, is there? _You_ haven't
sacrificed your life for anyone."

"No," he answered doubtfully, "n-no; but, you see, Sylvie, some one has
to take the skins. It isn't safe for Hugh."

"Yes, of course. So that's what you'll do all your life--carry loads to
and fro, between this cabin and the trading-station. But if Hugh goes
away himself?"

"Yes?" he asked breathlessly.

His skillful hands paused in their fashioning of a snare.

"You know, of course, that he wants to take me away with him, to marry
me, to start life again."

"And--and you will, Sylvie?"

"Give me your advice," she said. She pressed her red lips together; her
face was bent upon him as though she watched.

"But," he stammered, "you tell me all the time, a dozen times a day,
that I'm badly trained. What good's my advice?"

"_Are_ you badly trained?"

"I suppose so."

"You are absurdly unselfish, Pete!" She moved a chip along the ground
with her foot, but Pete failed to notice this curious seeing gesture.

"Why? What do you mean?"

She waited, waited until, in the sickness of his vague suspense, his
hands had turned cold and the color had sucked itself in irregular
heartbeats from his lips.

At last she spoke deliberately. "You would lay down your life for your
friend?" she said. It was almost a whisper.

Pete's face went red and white and red again. Through the tumult of his
heart he searched for loyal words.

"I love Hugh--if that's what you mean," he said.

"I love you?" she repeated softly, perversely. "Did you say 'Hugh' or
'you,' Pete?"

His face tightened; faint lines came about his mouth. "I said 'Hugh!'"

"Ah--you love only him--nobody else in all the world?"

Her young and wistful voice came to him like a fragrance. He struggled
as though his spirit were fighting in deep water. He tried to remember
Hugh. He rose up slowly to meet this passionate moment, and now he made
a short step toward the waiting girl. She _was_ waiting, breathing fast.
Pete's arms quivered at his sides.

A hand gripped the quivering muscles and turned him about. Hugh had come
up behind, without sound, on moccasined feet. His face was gray; his
eyes were drawn into slits; his distorted mouth was trying to become a
straight, hard line. The effort gave a twitch to the pale, lower lip.

Sylvie stood up, singing as though in absent-minded idleness, and
vanished into the house. It would have been difficult to tell whether or
not she had heard Hugh's arrival.

"What's the matter?" Pete stammered like a boy wakened from a dream to
behold a lifted cane. "Let go my arm, Hugh. Your fingers cut."

"Come away from the house," said Hugh coldly, tightening the iron grip
as though Pete's wincing gave him satisfaction. "Come up here by the
pines. I want to talk to you."

"I'll come," said Pete. "Let go my arm."

There was that in his voice that compelled obedience. Hugh's hand fell
and knotted into a fist. Pete walked beside him up the abrupt slope of
their hollow to the little hill above the river. Its noise was loud in
the still, sunny air. There was no wind stirring. It was high noon. A
sloping tent of shadow drooped from the pines and made a dark circle
about their roots. In this transparent, purplish tent the brothers faced
each other. Pete's lips were tremulous, and Hugh's distorted.

"Now," said Hugh, breathing irregularly and speaking very low, "I'll
tell you what I think of you."

"No, Hugh, don't," Pete pleaded. "You'll say things you don't
mean--unkind things, terrible things. I don't deserve it from you.
You--you think that I--that I--"

"Go on. Don't stop. Tell me what I think--I think--that you--that you--"

It was an unbearable moment, an impossible atmosphere, for the
revelation of a first love. Pete felt stripped and shamed.

"You think that I was telling Sylvie, that Sylvie--that I--"

Hugh lifted his hand and struck. The younger man sprang back, then
forward, and was at his elder's throat. For an instant they struggled,
silently, terribly, slipping on the red pine-needles. Then Pete gave a
hard laugh. "Are we tigers?" he asked, and he pulled himself back and
leaned, shaking, against a tree-trunk, gripping it with his hands. His
blue eyes were cold and blazing in his white face, against which Hugh's
blow had made a mark. "You won't strike me again," Pete said. All
boyishness was gone from his hard, level voice. "Go on. Say what you
like. I'll listen."

"You liar!" stormed Hugh. "You cheat!"

Pete laughed again.

A certain quality in his bitter self-control flicked Hugh. He tried to
emulate the young man's coolness.

"I've trusted you," he began again; "and behind my back you have been
trying to win the love of the woman who has promised to be my wife."

"I have not."

"You were not making love to her there, then, when I came up behind you?
When you were so excited that you didn't hear me? when you were moving
toward her--trembling all over? _I_ felt your arm!"

Pete's eyes dropped, then lifted as though under a great weight.

"And you say you're not a liar!"

"I _am_ a liar, though not in the way you mean. We are all liars. We
have caught that little blind girl in a trap. We have lied to her, all
three of us--Bella and I, and you, Hugh--you have lied most of all."

"She loves me," Hugh panted. "She knows me. She understands me."

"Yes," Pete answered, trembling. "I've seen that. I've kept quiet. Bella
and I have given you your happiness. Now you thank me by striking me and
calling me a liar and a cheat!"

Hugh, even in the midst of his bitter and suspicious rage, felt the
justice of the reproach. He paused, looked about, then came close, put a
hand on each of his brother's shoulders, searching the white, young face
with his wild eyes.

"I must have Sylvie," he groaned. "Pete, I must. You don't know; you
can't know--" He dropped his grizzled head against Pete's neck, and his
breath caught. "You don't know what I felt when I saw you there, when I
thought--Tell me the truth, Pete. You are not going to take my love, my
only joy, my one prize away from me?"

After a long and difficult silence Pete put his arm half mechanically
across the twisted, gasping back.

"Of course not, Hugh. I--I couldn't. But I've had to play a part, and
it's not come easy. You must have guessed how hard it's been, because
you seem to have guessed how I--how Sylvie--Perhaps if I went away?"

He was gripped again, shaken a little. "No, don't leave me. Wait. It
won't be long. She will go away with me soon, as soon as she gets over
a girl's timidity. Pete, she does love me. She does. Don't stand dumb;
tell me that she does."

"She does," Pete repeated tonelessly.

"I'm sorry I struck you. I have a devil's temper. And I think of you as
still a boy. I wanted to beat you. A few years ago I would have beaten
you." He put this forward as though it were a reasonable excuse.

"Yes." Pete smiled grimly. "I can remember your beatings." He drew
himself away. "Shall we go back?"

Hugh still held him, though at arm's length. "First I must have a
promise from you." He spoke sternly.

"What do you want?"

"I want your promise to keep hands off, to hold your tongue to the end."

"You won't trust me, then?"

"Not since I watched you moving toward her, not since I felt your arm."

Pete was silent. He studied the ground. There was a sullen look on his
face, and his tightened mouth deepened the odd, incongruous dimple.

"Well, perhaps you're right. I promise." He flashed up a blue
desperation of young eyes as he asked: "How long will it last, Hugh?"

"Not long. Not long. Surely not long."

"I promise."

"Give me your hand."

They came back down from the hill.




CHAPTER XIII


Pete looked forward with white-hot impatience to the day of his trip
to the trading-station; twelve hours of relief, it would mean, from the
worst pressure of his torment--twelve hours of merciful solitude in the
old, voiceful friendliness of his forest trail. He started early, at the
break of a sweet, singing dawn. The earth was elastic under his feet,
the air tingling and mellow with a taste of growth; the flooded river
chattered loudly like a creature half beside itself with joy. Pete
came out of the dark and silent cabin in which he had made his tiptoe
preparations, and lifted his face, letting the light, soft fingers of
the wind, cooler and softer even than Sylvie's, smooth out the knots of
suffering from his tired brain. He shook his shoulders before settling
them under the load of pelts. He would, he swore, just for this day,
be a boy again. He sprang lightly up from the hollow and strode forward
with long, swift steps, swinging a companionable stick in his free hand.

Loneliness and the dawn and love had made a poet of the young man, so
that he had the release of poetry and forgot reality in its translation
into a tale that is told. He thought of Sylvie, but he thought of her as
a man thinks of a lovely memory. He went through the wood with his chin
lifted, half smiling, almost happy, an integral part of the wild, glad,
wistful spring.

It was not until the afternoon when he was nearing the station--just, in
fact, before he left the wood-trail for the rutted, frontier road--that
his mind was caught as sharply as a cloth by a needle, by the light
sound of following steps. In the solitude of that trail which his feet
alone had worn, the sound brought him to a stop with a sense of terror
and suspense. His mind leaped to Hugh, and for the first time in his
loyal life Pete remembered, and remembering, felt a creeping on his
skin, that this brother of his, who had grown harsh and jealous and
suspicious, had been a murderer. The cold, unkindly memory slid along
his senses like a snake. On the edge of the sloping road-bank, studded
with little yellow flowers, just where the trees stopped, Pete set down
his load and waited, instinctively bracing his body, drawing it back
beneath the shelter of one of the big pines.

The steps were light and swift and stealthy. In the purplish confusion
of the distance, a tangled and yet ordered regiment of trunks and
boughs, sun-splotches and shadow-blots, through which the uncertain
trail seemed to rise like a slender thread of smoke to the pale, flecked
sky, Pete made out a moving shape. It slipped in and out; it hesitated,
hurried, paused, moved on. With a shudder of relief and of surprise,
Pete saw it; out from behind the great, close trunks came Sylvie,
her chin lifted, her hands stretched out on either side, brushing the
swinging branches along the trail, her small head turning from this side
to that, as though she listened in suspense.

Pete called out her name and ran quickly to meet her. Forgetting
his part of a dull, sullen boy, he spoke eagerly, catching her hand,
watching the warm, happy blush flow in her cheeks.

"Where were you?" she asked. She had stood to wait for him as soon as
his voice reached her. "I couldn't see--I mean, I lost the sound of your
steps. I've been following you for hours and hours and hours. I was so
afraid of being lost again that I didn't dare drop too far behind."

"But why didn't you call to me? Why have you come? Is anything wrong at
home?"

Her fingers moved uncertainly in his grasp, like the fingers of a shy
child. "Nothing is wrong. I wanted to come with you. I wanted to go to
the trading-station and the post-office. I didn't dare ask you to
take me with you. I was afraid you'd send me home. I suppose I'll be a
nuisance, but--Oh, Pete, please be nice to me and take care of me, won't
you?" She paused, turned her face away from him and smiled. "After
all, since you have called me your wife before witnesses, you ought to
introduce me to your friends at the trading-station, oughtn't you? They
might think it was queer that I should hide myself, now that the snow
has gone."

He dropped her hand. Suddenly he realized the consequences, the
necessary effect upon Hugh of this willful venture of hers.

"Does Hugh know where you are?" he asked painfully.

"No. I ran away. I heard you getting ready, and I just felt that I
couldn't bear to be left behind. I slipped out of bed so quietly that
Bella didn't even stir, and I dressed just as quietly, and when you had
gone half across the clearing, I ran out after you, listening to your
steps. You see, I have the hearing, as well as the touch, of the blind."
This was said with a cunning sort of recklessness; but Pete, absorbed in
his anxiety, did not challenge the improbable statement. "Please don't
be angry with me, Pete." She touched his hand where it hung at his side.
"Can't I have my adventure? Let's call it _ours_."

In spite of himself, the young man's pulse quickened, but his face and
voice were stern.

"Do you know that we'll be very late?" he said. "It will be midnight
before we can possibly make it back to the cabin, if you can even do it
at all. You'll have to spend the night somewhere at the station. What
will they think? They will be anxious, Bella and Hugh."

"But what can they think?" Her cheeks were unexplainably scarlet. "If I
choose to trust you to take care of me, why should they grumble? And I
won't have to spend the night. You don't know how strong I am. I'm
very strong. I don't feel tired. We'll go back by moonlight. There's a
beautiful moon."

"It will be almost morning." He made a reckless gesture. "Well, it's too
late to think of that now. Come on."

He threw himself down the bank, held up his hands to catch hers, and
swung her down beside him. The sun slanted warmly along the road and
just ahead flickered the blue ripples of a lake.

Sylvie moved quickly and easily beside him, barely touching his arm with
her hand. She seemed definitely to decide to put away her childishness.
She treated him as though she had forgotten his supposed youth; she
talked straightforwardly, with a certain dignity, about her childhood,
about her amusing and pitiful experience as a third-rate little actress,
and she asked him a question now and then half diffidently, which
he answered in stumbling, careful speech, always weighed upon by his
promise, by the deception he must practice, by the dread of what must
come. Nevertheless, minute by minute, his pulse quickened. This, God be
thanked, would mean the end. The insufferable knot of circumstance,
so fantastic, so extravagantly unlivable and unreal, would break, Hugh
would tear the tangle of his making to tatters with angry hands when
they got back. His difficult trust in Pete's promise would go down under
the strain of these long and unexplained hours of Sylvie's absence in
his company. It was the last act in the extravaganza, queer and painful,
that had twisted them all out of their real shapes for the confusion of
a blind waif. This adventure that Sylvie's impatience had planned would
bring down the curtain. After all, no matter what came of it, Pete was
glad. The color warmed his face; his blue eyes deepened; he smiled
down at Sylvie beside him. For this hour she seemed to belong to him
rightfully, naturally, by her own will. He let go of his inhibitions and
resigned himself to Fate.

When, on the far shore of the lake, the low walls of the trading-station
came in sight, a double image, reflected faithfully with the strip of
sand at its door, the low, level wall of pines behind and the blue,
still sky above, Pete caught the girl's hand in his.

"Here we are, Sylvie," he said. "Keep quiet and follow my lead.
Remember, now, that I am supposed to be your husband and you my wife.
Can you play that part?"

She nodded, bending down her face so that he saw only the tip of her
small, sunburnt chin. She was hatless; the sun struck blue, bright lines
in her black hair.

"I'll be careful, Pete."

She pressed his hand, and he returned the pressure.

The station was full of silent curiosity; a couple of squaws, a serious
buck Indian, and a bearded trapper or two made little secret of their
observation. In the far corner of the big, bare room, down one side
of which ran a long and littered counter, there was another, even more
interested spectator of the young couple's entrance. He sat at a
small table under one of the high, unshaded windows, and from over
a spread-out time-table he gave them a large and heavy share of
his attention. He was a man of middle age and sturdy build, round,
clean-shaven, dressed in Eastern outing clothes of dignified
correctness. He put on a pair of glasses to peer closer at the two
who came in hand in hand like adventuring children, with the lithe,
half-fearful grace of wild things.

A tall and sallow man behind the counter smiled under his long, ragged,
blond mustache and made a gesture of polite greeting.

"Well, you've sure kept us in the dark as to your movements, Peter
Garth. We had no notion there was a bride in these parts until the
sheriff brought us back word the other day. Ma'am, I'm glad to make your
acquaintance." He glanced keenly and curiously at Sylvie's averted face.

"I'd have been here before," she said, "but I've been suffering from
snow-blindness."

"Ah, that's bad sometimes. Your eyes are better now?"

"Y-yes, I think so."

"I can give you a first-class lotion, lady."

Sylvie and he discussed the lotion while Pete stood, drawn up, proud
and silent, his cheeks flushed, waiting to dispose of his pelts. The
bartering prolonged itself in spite of his best endeavors. Sylvie seemed
to have no sense of peril or anxiety. She insisted upon taking a bite of
early supper, forced coffee and bread and meat upon her companion, and
chatted affably. Pete saw that the Eastern stranger had riveted upon her
his attention, that he observed every gesture, listened to every
word, and while she ate, that he walked over and asked a few murmured
questions of the trader, nodding his head, then shaking it over the
answers as though they confirmed some suspicion or anxiety.

At last Pete could bear the delay no longer. Gruffly he bade Sylvie come
with him. He caught her hand and led her out, she looking back over her
shoulder like a loath child. They had gone but a few yards along the
beach trail when the sober, solid gentleman came out across the porch
and waved his hand to them. Pete hastened his steps without replying.
Then came a summons in a loud, full, authoritative voice: "Hi, there!
One moment, please."

It was already evening; the lake was ruffled rosily under a sunset
light. Pete stopped and turned. He waited, pale, tightlipped, and
formidable; Sylvie moved a little closer to him. This mysterious summons
gave her a first little spasm of distrust and fear. The man's square
body and square, serious face bore down upon them, freighted with
incongruous judgments. He came sturdily, defying the unspoken threat of
loneliness.

He spoke when he came up to them--spoke with evident effort.

"My friends," he said, "I am a minister of the gospel, and though
my mission in this wilderness does not rightly include you in its
ministrations, still, my conscience, the commands of my Master, will not
allow me to neglect so obvious and urgent a call for spiritual aid."

He cleared his throat. "Your name I didn't catch," he said doubtfully,
and Pete did not supply the knowledge, "but I heard you introduce this
young woman as your wife. I watched her very closely; I watched you,
too, sir; I took the liberty of making some inquiries about you. I have
had much and varied experience in the study of human nature." Here he
put out a broad, clean hand with square finger-tips and lifted Sylvie's
brown, unwilling left hand high from her side. "I am a minister of the
gospel," he repeated. "In a land where such a symbol is thought much of,
this woman has no wedding-ring. There is no register of your marriage
here in the one spot where such a registration might have been most
conveniently made--"

Sylvie jerked away her fingers; Pete laid down his load and slowly drew
his right hand into a terrible fist.

"No, no!" The square-tipped fingers were lifted deprecatingly. "You must
not be angry with me, my children. I am not here to judge you. I have
no knowledge of your temptation, of your difficulties; you have met and
loved in a wild and difficult land. I was not even sure of my surmise.
Now, however; your silence and your anger confirm my opinion. I want
only to offer you my services. Will you continue in your life and love
as I have seen them to be, or will you, if only for the sake of other
lives not yet your responsibility--perhaps, will you take advantage of
this opportunity which God has now given you and let me make you indeed
man and wife?"

Pete's fist was still terrible, and his lips were gathering their words,
when Sylvie unbelievably spoke.

"Pete," she asked tremulously, and he felt her drawing even closer to
his side, "Pete, don't you want--you _do_ want--I know--I mean, will
you, would you--marry me?"

He was dumb as a rock, and gray. His hand opened; he stared from her
to the impossible intruder, the worker of the miracle, or rather for
he felt like a beast trapped, the strange layer of the snare. For an
instant the lake and the forest and the red sky turned in a great wheel
before his eyes. Then he caught Sylvie's wrist almost brutally in his
hand. "Be quiet!" he said; it was the savage speaking to his woman.
"You've gone mad. Come with me. As for you, sir, my marrying or not
marrying is none of your business--"

The minister looked sadly up into the young man's white and rigid face.

"God be with you!"

He bowed, turned and walked back along the beach, hands locked behind
his broad tweed back, his head bent.

Pete tightened his grip on Sylvie's arm. "Come," he said to her as
harshly as before. "We must hurry. It's nearly night."

Sylvie set her small teeth tight, bent down her head, and followed him
without a word. Their silence seemed to grow into a pressure, a weight.
It bent Pete's shoulders and Sylvie's slender neck, and whitened their
lips. All that they did not dare to say aloud bulked itself, huge and
thunderous, before the combined consciousness which makes a strange
third companion in such dual silences. They dared not pause, or look at
each other, or move their strained lips for fear truth, the desperate,
treacherous truth, would leap out and link them like a lightning-flash.
The somber forest enveloped them. They moved through it as through a
deep wall that opened by enchantment. The moon came up, gibbous and
white and glittering, paler than silver; and the forest became streaked
and mottled with its light. A soft, sudden wind tore the light and shade
into eerie, dancing ribbons and tatters and shreds. There were such
sounds as are not heard in daylight--moon sounds and cloud sounds and
sounds of dark wind; branches talked and other small voices answered in
anxious undertones. A moose rubbed his antlers and coughed. They heard
his big body hulking through a swamp down there in a well of darkness.

"I can't go so fast." Sylvie's shaken voice moved doubtfully. "I'm
tired."

She pulled at his arm and stopped. The whole forest seemed to sway and
stir and urge them to haste and secrecy.

"A storm's coming," Pete answered. "I can't carry you, Sylvie, unless I
leave my load."

"Do you think I'd let you carry me?" she answered through her set teeth.
"I'd rather die here than let you lift me up in your arms. I'll go on
till I drop. I don't care for the storm. But I can't walk so fast. How
can you see? The moon isn't--can't be, I mean--very, very bright here in
the woods."

"The moon? There's a big storm-cloud just going to wipe it out. Listen!
Don't you hear that thunder, that wind?"

The storm blew its distant trumpets, shouted louder, trampled the world
with great steps, crashed and came upon them with a wet, cold blast.
They were stunned with noise, dazzled with flashes, smothered and beaten
with long, wet whips. Under a big rocking pine which shouted with a
hundred confused tongues they found a dangerous shelter. Not far from
them a tree was struck, splitting their ears, half stunning them. When
the worst was over, Pete drew Sylvie out relentlessly and started in
the heavily falling rain. The storm was drawing away, but the night was
still impenetrably black. They walked for a few groping yards when Pete
gave a sudden desperate laugh and stopped.

"What's the good of this! We're off the trail. We'll have to wait for
the light. My God! How cold and wet and trembling you are." He threw
down his pack, took off his coat, wet only on the outside, and wrapped
it closely about her. She felt that he parted branches for her, and she
knew that they were in a dry, still, scented place whose walls stirred
and breathed. She sank down beside him on the smooth pine-needles
and crept close. They were giddy, beaten and confused; they felt each
other's trembling warmth; for greater comfort she tucked her hands under
his arm. Her head dropped back against his shoulder so that her breath
fell on his cheek. He felt the silent tears of her humiliation, hot and
bitter and human after the cold, impersonal wetness of rain. It was as
though a hand drew them together in the darkness; they moved numbly at
the same instant, by the same impulse; then with a sort of convulsion
they were in each other's arms. Cold, wet, tremulous, their lips met.
The night became the beating of a heart.




CHAPTER XIV


Hugh sat in his great carved chair, his hands laid out across the bulky
arms, his head bent forward a little so that his eyes encompassed all
the restless beauty of the fire. After nightfall, when the wind began
to shake the cabin, he had built up the fire, and its light now fought
ruddily against the whiteness of the moon. Hugh had not lighted his
lamp, nor let Bella light it, but he told her to make some strong coffee
and keep it hot on the stove. "When Sylvie comes in," he had said,
"she'll be exhausted. We'll give her a hot drink and send her to bed,
eh, Bella! The foolish child!" This had been said softly, but with a
wild, half-vacant look which Bella could not meet.

It was her belief that Pete and Sylvie had gone, not to return that
night or any other night. In a desperate, still fashion she guarded this
flaming conviction, peering up from long contemplations of it to learn
whether there flickered any light of torment on Hugh's face. But all
day, after the queer blankness of face and eyes with which he had first
received her news of Sylvie's disappearance, he had been alternately gay
and tranquil. All morning he had mended his boat, and in the afternoon
he had cleaned his gun; and whenever he could cajole Bella into being
his audience, he had talked. His talk was all of Sylvie, of her pretty
childishness, her sweet, wayward ways, of her shyness, her timidity; and
later, when supper was cleared away and he had throned himself in
the center of that familiar circle of firelight, he had dropped his
beautiful voice to a lower key and had boasted of Sylvie's love for him.

Bella sat on a big log sawed to the height of a low stool. She sat with
her face bent down between her hands as though she were saving her eyes
from the fire, but those bright, devoted eyes never left Hugh's face,
though sometimes they made of it but a blurred image set in the broken
crystals of her tears.

Thus, together, they heard the first rumble of the storm and saw the
white squares of moonlight wiped from the floor as with a dark cloth.
Next, the windows seemed to jump at them and jump away. "Lightning!"
said Hugh. "She'll be afraid! Will Pete be able to comfort her? Will he,
Bella?" Then, because she took courage to look into his face, she saw
that his heart had been burnt all day, but that his faith, stronger than
his fear, had kept the flame smothered, almost below his consciousness.

While the storm raged across their roof, beat a brutal tattoo close
above their deafened heads, pushed at the door, drove a pool of water
under the threshold, Hugh walked up and down, to and fro, from fire
to window, from door to wall, but not fast, rather with a sort of
stateliness. Sometimes he looked sidelong at Bella's expressionless,
listening face. At last he forced himself back to the chair and sat
there, mechanically polishing the barrel of his gun, but his tongue
still spoke the saga of illusion. It stopped when the storm dropped into
the bottomless silence of dawn. Then there was only the dripping from
their eaves. Hugh sat there, very white, his gun laid across his lap.
Bella, as white, lifted her face.

"They're coming," she whispered, and got stiffly to her feet.

Hugh moved back into his chair, turning sidewise and gathering himself
as though for a spring. His nervous hands clutched at his gun. Upon the
silence the door opened, and Pete and Sylvie came into the room. Wet and
storm-beaten and beautiful they were, with scarlet cheeks.

Pete came quickly over to Hugh's chair; he let fall his pack and gazed
resolutely down at his brother's face.

"Sylvie had a fancy to come with me to the trading-station," he said.
"She came out after me and didn't overtake me until just where the trail
comes out into the road. We hurried back, but the storm caught us. It
was pitch-black in the woods; we couldn't keep the trail. We had to
wait for daylight. I hope you weren't too anxious about her,
Hugh.--Bella"--he glanced over his shoulder--"could you make us some hot
coffee and help Sylvie into some dry clothes? We are properly drenched,
both of us."

This speaker of terse, authoritative sentences was not the boy that had
gone out that morning. That boy was gone forever.

Hugh stood up and looked slowly from Sylvie, who had stayed near the
door and held her head up like a queen, to Pete.

"Where were you," he asked gently--"where were you while it stormed?"

Pete moved toward the fire, holding out his hands. "Ugh!" he shivered,
"I'm numb with cold."

"Where were you," Hugh repeated, "during the storm?"

Pete lifted his eyes slowly. They were bluer than the blue heart of a
sapphire. "Under a pine-tree," he answered casually enough, and then,
just as Hugh would have smiled, the color creeping up into his lips,
Pete's young and honest blood poured over his forehead, engulfing him,
blazing the truth across his face. Bella saw it and clenched her hands.
Sylvie's cheeks, too, caught fire. Hugh turned from him, blinded by
terror, saw Sylvie's trembling mouth in her dyed countenance, and turned
back. He lifted the hand that had held, all this while, to the chair,
and balled it into a fist.

"Don't strike him," said Sylvie quietly, not moving from her place by
the door. "Don't ever strike him again--_Ham Rutherford_!"

Hugh's bones seemed to crumble; his knees bent; he leaned back against
the chair, holding to it behind him with both hands. The gun clattered
to the floor. In the silence Sylvie walked across the room and lifted
her face. As if for the first time they saw her eyes, black and
brilliant and young, sharpening the softness of her features. She looked
at Hugh mercilessly, pitilessly.

"I've been able to see you for a long time now, Ham Rutherford," she
said. "And the instant I first saw you, I knew your name. Ever since the
night you told me that story about the river, I've been watching you.
You are a great and infamous liar! Yes, I know that you once killed a
man for telling you that. Kill me if you like, for I am going to repeat
it after him--a liar, hideous and deformed outside and in. I have no
pity for a liar. Not even your physical misfortune shall shield you!
You have made too great a mockery of it. You brought me here, blind, as
helpless as one of the things you catch in your traps, and you played
the hero with me. And you fed me with lies and lies and lies. I've eaten
and drunk them until I'm sick. Now stand up and look at the truth. You
are to eat that until _you_ are sick.--No, Bella; no, Pete; I'm going to
speak; no one can stop me. I know you love him. How you can look at him
and see him as he is and know what he has done and still love him, I
can't understand. Now, Hugh Garth--the name you tried to make me love
you by--I'll tell these people that love you, some of the beautiful
fables with which you tried to win _my_ love. Maybe, then, they will
begin to see you as you are. Here is the first: 'There was once a very
noble youth who had a friend--'"

"Don't!" Hugh groaned pitifully, his head bent before her.

"Perhaps I won't; after all, it's not interesting unless you're fool
enough, or blind enough, to be tricked into fancying it's the truth. But
let me tell them some of the other things. This noble youth, this man
sacrificed his life for his friend and bore the blame of that friend's
guilt. He is as handsome as a Viking, the very ideal of a girl's
imagination, strong and shapely and graceful. Has he a humped shoulder
and a lame leg and a scarred face revealing his scarred soul? Answer
me."

Hugh flinched as though under a lash.

Pete put out his hand uncertainly; his face was drawn with pain.
"Sylvie--stop. You _must_ stop. You're too cruel. He did lie to you, but
remember, that was because he--"

The brilliant black eyes flashed back at him.

"Because he loved me, you were going to say? When you love a woman, do
you try to ruin her life? Do you creep up in the dark under cover of her
blindness and touch her with some dreadful, poisonous wound? You
don't know my horror of that man, Pete. Oh, he kissed--kissed me!" She
shivered. "A murderer! Yes, a murderer. Oh, Ham Rutherford, if I could
only _make_ you see yourself! If I could give you my eyes when they
opened, and I saw Pete's beauty and Bella's sweetness and the horrible
ugliness of you! And then, day by day--you see, I was afraid to let you
know that I _had_ seen you. I was in terror of you, of what you might
do to me. I was afraid of you all; you had all deceived me. Day by day
I learned the utter distortion of you, mind, body, and soul. How could
I help but--but--" She faltered and half turned to Pete, holding out
her hands. Her indignation at the treachery practiced upon her, an anger
that had grown in silence to unbearable heat, had spent itself in words.
She was all for consolation now--for sympathy. But Pete stepped back
from her. He was looking at Hugh, and his clear, young face was an open
wound.

Hugh pushed himself up and slowly lifted his face. It was then that he
saw Sylvie's hands stretched out to Pete. He started--no one knew what
the convulsive movement meant; but as he started--the gun tripped him.
He caught it up carelessly, blindly. There was a flash--a crash. Pete
leaped and bent, holding his arm. Blood spurted between his fingers,
soaking his wet sleeve; and Sylvie, crying aloud, wrapped him in
trembling, protective arms.

"I'm not much hurt," he said half dazedly. "It--it was an accident. He
didn't mean it. I was looking at him. The gun went off. He didn't shoot
at me.... _Hugh_!"

The man was staring straight ahead of him, and now he drew his hand
across his eyes, the fingers crooked as though they tore a veil.

"Now," he said, "I do see myself just as I am. Yes, I did shoot at you.
Yes, I think I meant to kill you. I must have meant to kill you. That's
the truth. For the second time I'm a murderer. Yet now, as God lives,
even if I am down in the dust, I'll lay hold of my stars. I'm going to
walk out of your lives so that they can shape themselves to their
own good ends. Sylvie can shape yours with you, Pete." He hesitated a
moment. "If a coward, a murderer, can say 'God bless you,' take that
blessing!"

He picked up his gun and shuffled across the floor, flinching aside from
Bella as though he could bear no further touch or word, and went out of
the door, letting in the brightness of the sunrise.

Pete had sunk into a chair, faint from the shock and weakness of his
wound; and Sylvie bent over him. For a minute, in great and bitter
loneliness Bella stood and watched them; then she followed Hugh.

He had put down his gun and gone slowly up from the hollow and was
walking along the river-bank. He had the look of a man who strolls in
meditation. When he came to his boat where it lay near the roots of the
three big pines, he turned it over--he had been mending its bottom the
morning of yesterday--and began to push it down toward the plunging
stream. The glitter of morning took all the swirlings and ripplings
and plungings of the swift water in its golden hands. Hugh steadied the
boat. Above him on the bank Bella spoke quietly.

"Hugh," she said, "look up at me. What are you going to do?"

He lifted his face, still holding to the boat.

"What are you going to do?" she repeated.

"Why do you want to know? You've heard the truth."

She came down the bank and stood beside him so close that her hair,
loosened by the wind, was blown against his shoulder. She pressed it
back and gazed into his eyes. The inner glow had worn through at last.
She was all warmth, all flame now. She smiled with soft and parted lips.
"Do you think that was the truth of you, my dear," she said, "_my_ truth
of you? I have always seen you as you are. But"--she drew a big breath,
like a climber who has reached the height--"but--I came to you, didn't
I?"

Hugh's eyes widened, the pupils swallowing her light. "You--you came to
me? Not for Pete's sake?"

"Never for his sake."

"But, Bella--you laughed at me."

"Yes, once, for your poor folly in trying to be what you are not. When
have I ever laughed at what you are? It's what you are I've loved, my
dear, just what you are--a tormented child. Only be honest with me,
Hugh. Tell me what do you want: the moon now or--or all the truth?"

"I want the truth--and the end," he said. "I'm going down the river."

She glanced at the flood as though it were a brook. "I am going with you
then. You must take me. My life has always been yours."

He laid one of his hands on either of her cheeks so that her face was
framed for him to read. It was flushed; the deep eyes were beautiful.

"You--all these empty years! _You_, Bella." It was as though he saw her
now for the first time. The revelation dazzled him. "I've gone thirsty,
with wine at my elbow, until it's too late." He shook his shoulders.
"Come with me, then, if you must."

She stepped into the boat and sat in the stern, her hands folded in her
lap, her eyes in their great and sudden beauty still fixed on his face.
The wind blew her hair wildly in a long, streaming veil across her
forehead, down her cheek, out over her shoulder. She was beautiful with
the joy that was hers at last.

Hugh stepped in and stood to push the boat out from the shore. His
eyes never left hers. It was a deep, long look of which her soul drank,
quenching its thirst. Very slowly the boat moved; then it turned. A hand
seemed to grip it's prow. There was a mighty, confused roaring in their
ears; the bank seemed to be snatched back from them. The sunlight, shone
into Hugh's face. Suddenly he caught at his oar.

"The river is not so high," he shouted; "the flood's going down." He
looked away from her and back. "We have--just a chance. We'll leave it
to the river. It may be the end of you and me--or, Bella, it may be the
beginning."

He steadied the boat with all his skill. It was drawn with frightful
swiftness down the swollen stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before noon Sylvie and Pete moved slowly across the open space and went
back along their forest trail. They walked like lovers, and Sylvie's
arm helped to support him. Just before he stepped in among the trees he
turned for a long, desolate, backward look.

Now the hoop of green, once white as paper under the noon sun, and the
level, circular rim of the forest are empty and silent except for the
rattling of the river and the moving of the pines against the fixed,
grave stars. The human tragedy--or was it comedy?--has burnt itself out
like the embers of a camp-fire that will never again be kindled in that
lonely spot.

  THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Snow-Blind, by Katharine Newlin Burt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SNOW-BLIND ***

***** This file should be named 7520.txt or 7520.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/5/2/7520/

Produced by Ketaki Chhabra and Wendy Crockett

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
