The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Flower, by Henry Van Dyke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Red Flower
       Poems Written in War Time

Author: Henry Van Dyke

Posting Date: August 31, 2012 [EBook #9388]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 28, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED FLOWER ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Tonya Allen and PG Distributed Proofreaders









THE RED FLOWER

POEMS WRITTEN IN WAR TIME

BY
HENRY VAN DYKE
D.O.L. (OXON.)


1919



PREFACE


These are verses that came to me in this dreadful war time amid the cares
and labors of a heavy task.

Two of the poems, "A Scrap of Paper" and "Stand Fast," were written in
1914 and bore the signature _Civis Americanus_--the use of my own
name at the time being impossible. Two others, "Lights Out" and "Remarks
about Kings," were read for me by Robert Underwood Johnson at the meeting
of the American Academy in Boston, November, 1915, at which I was unable
to be present.

The rest of the verses were printed after I had resigned my diplomatic post
and was free to say what I thought and felt, without reserve.

The "Interludes in Holland" are thoughts of the peaceful things that will
abide for all the world after we have won this war against war.

SYLVANORA, October 1, 1917.




CONTENTS


PREMONITION
  THE RED FLOWER (JUNE, 1914)

THE TRIAL AS BY FIRE
  A SCRAP OF PAPER
  STAND FAST
  LIGHTS OUT (1915)
  REMARKS ABOUT KINGS
  WAR-MUSIC
  MIGHT AND RIGHT
  THE PRICE OF PEACE
  STORM-MUSIC

FRANCE AND BELGIUM
  THE BELLS OP MALINES (AUGUST 17, 1914)
  THE NAME OF FRANCE
  JEANNE D'ARC RETURNS (1914-1916)

INTERLUDES IN HOLLAND
  THE HEAVENLY HILLS OF HOLLAND
  THE PROUD LADY
  FLOOD-TIDE OF FLOWERS (IN HOLLAND)

ENTER AMERICA
  AMERICAN'S PROSPERITY
  THE GLORY OF SHIPS
  MARE LIBERUM
  "LIBERTY ENLIGHTENING THE WORLD"
  THE OXFORD THRUSHES (FEBRUARY, 1917)
  HOMEWARD BOUND




PREMONITION




  THE RED FLOWER

  June 1914


  In the pleasant time of Pentecost,
    By the little river Kyll,
  I followed the angler's winding path
    Or waded the stream at will.
  And the friendly fertile German land
    Lay round me green and still.

  But all day long on the eastern bank
    Of the river cool and clear,
  Where the curving track of the double rails
    Was hardly seen though near,
  The endless trains of German troops
    Went rolling down to Trier.

  They packed the windows with bullet heads
    And caps of hodden gray;
  They laughed and sang and shouted loud
    When the trains were brought to a stay;
  They waved their hands and sang again
    As they went on their iron way.

  No shadow fell on the smiling land,
    No cloud arose in the sky;
  I could hear the river's quiet tune
    When the trains had rattled by;
  But my heart sank low with a heavy sense
    Of trouble,--I knew not why.

  Then came I into a certain field
    Where the devil's paint-brush spread
  'Mid the gray and green of the rolling hills
    A flaring splotch of red,
  An evil omen, a bloody sign,
    And a token of many dead.

  I saw in a vision the field-gray horde
    Break forth at the devil's hour,
  And trample the earth into crimson mud
    In the rage of the Will to Power,--
  All this I dreamed in the valley of Kyll,
    At the sign of the blood-red flower.




  A SCRAP OF PAPER


  "Will you go to war just for a scrap of paper?"--_Question of the
  German Chancellor to the British Ambassador, August 3, 1914._

  A mocking question! Britain's answer came
  Swift as the light and searching as the flame.

  "Yes, for a scrap of paper we will fight
  Till our last breath, and God defend the right!

  "A scrap of paper where a name is set
  Is strong as duty's pledge and honor's debt.

  "A scrap of paper holds for man and wife
  The sacrament of love, the bound of life.

  "A scrap of paper may be Holy Writ
  With God's eternal word to hallow it.

  "A scrap of paper binds us both to stand
  Defenders of a neutral neighbor land.

  "By God, by faith, by honor, yes! We fight
  To keep our name upon that paper white."


  September, 1914




  STAND FAST


        Stand fast, Great Britain!
  Together England, Scotland, Ireland stand
  One in the faith that makes a mighty land,
  True to the bond you gave and will not break
  And fearless in the fight for conscience' sake!
  Against Giant Robber clad in steel,
  With blood of trampled Belgium on his heel,
  Striding through France to strike you down at last,
        Britain, stand fast!

        Stand fast, brave land!
  The Huns are thundering toward the citadel;
  They prate of Culture but their path is Hell;
  Their light is darkness, and the bloody sword
  They wield and worship is their only Lord.
  O land where reason stands secure on right,
  O land where freedom is the source of light,
  Against the mailed Barbarians' deadly blast,
        Britain, stand fast!

        Stand fast, dear land!
  Thou island mother of a world-wide race,
  Whose children speak thy tongue and love thy face,
  Their hearts and hopes are with thee in the strife,
  Their hands will break the sword that seeks thy life;
  Fight on until the Teuton madness cease;
  Fight bravely on, until the word of peace
  Is spoken in the English tongue at last,
        Britain, stand fast!


  September, 1914.




  LIGHTS OUT

  (1915)


  "Lights out" along the land,
  "Lights out" upon the sea.
  The night must put her hiding hand
  O'er peaceful towns where children sleep,
  And peaceful ships that darkly creep
  Across the waves, as if they were not free.

  The dragons of the air,
  The hell-hounds of the deep,
  Lurking and prowling everywhere,
  Go forth to seek their helpless prey,
  Not knowing whom they maim or slay--
  Mad harvesters, who care not what they reap.

  Out with the tranquil lights,
  Out with the lights that burn
  For love and law and human rights!
  Set back the clock a thousand years:
  All they have gained now disappears,
  And the dark ages suddenly return.

  Kaiser who loosed wild death
  And terror in the night
  God grant you draw no quiet breath,
  Until the madness you began
  Is ended, and long-suffering man,
  Set free from war lords, cries, "Let there be Light."


  October, 1915.

  Read at the meeting of the American Academy, Boston,
  November, 1915.




  REMARKS ABOUT KINGS

  _God said, "I am tired of kings._"--EMERSON.


  God said, "I am tired of kings,"--
  But that was a long time ago!
  And meantime man said, "No,
  I like their looks in their robes and rings."
  So he crowned a few more,
  And they went on playing the game as before
  Fighting and spoiling things.

  Man said, "I am tired of kings!
  Sons of the robber-chiefs of yore,
  They make me pay for their lust and their war;
  I am the puppet, they pull the strings;
  The blood of my heart is the wine they drink.
  I will govern myself for while I think,
  And see what that brings!"

  Then God, who made the first remark,
  Smiled in the dark.


  Read at the meeting of the American Academy, Boston.
  November, 1915.




  WAR-MUSIC


      Break off! Dance no more!
        Danger is at the door.
        Music is in arms.
      To signal war's alarms,

  Hark, a sudden trumpet calling
    Over the hill
  Why are you calling, trumpet, calling?
    What is your will?

    Men, men, men!
  Men who are ready to fight
  For their country's life, and the right.
  Of a liberty-loving land to be
    Free, free, free!
  Free from a tyrant's chain,
  Free from dishonor's stain,
  Free to guard and maintain
  All that her fathers fought for,
  All that her sons have wrought for,
    Resolute, brave, and free!

    Call again, trumpet, call again,
        Call up the men!
    Do you hear the storm of cheers
    Mingled with the women's tears
  And the tramp, tramp, tramp of marching feet?
    Do you hear the throbbing drum
    As the hosts of battle come
  Keeping time, time, time to its beat?
    O Music give a song
    To make their spirit strong
  For the fury of the tempest they must meet.

      The hoarse roar
      Of the monster guns;
      And the sharp bark
      Of the lesser guns;
      The whine of the shells,
      The rifles' clatter
      Where the bullets patter,
      The rattle, rattle, rattle
      Of the mitrailleuse in battle,
      And the yells
      Of the men who charge through hells
      Where the poison gas descends.
      And the bursting shrapnel rends
      Limb from limb
      In the dim
      Chaos and clamor of the strife
      Where no man thinks of his life
      But only of fighting through,
      Blindly fighting through, through!

    'Tis done
    At last!
    The victory won,
  The dissonance of warfare past!

    O Music mourn the dead
    Whose loyal blood was shed,
  And sound the taps for every hero slain;
    Then lend into the song
    That made their spirit strong,
  And tell the world they did not die in vain.

  Thank God we can see, in the glory of morn,
    The invincible flag that our fathers defended;
  And our hearts can repeat what the heroes have sworn,
    That war shall not end till the war-lust is ended,
  Then the bloodthirsty sword shall no longer be lord
    Of the nations oppressed by the conqueror's horde,
  But the banners of freedom shall peacefully wave
    O'er the world of the free and the lands of the brave.


  May, 1916




  MIGHT AND RIGHT


  If Might made Right, life were a wild-beasts' cage;
  If Right made Might, this were the golden age;
  But now, until we win the long campaign
  Right must gain Might to conquer and to reign.


  July 1, 1915.




  THE PRICE OF PEACE


  Peace without Justice is a low estate,--
  A coward cringing to an iron Fate!
  But Peace through Justice is the great ideal,--
  We'll pay the price of war to make it real.

  December 28, 1916.




  STORM MUSIC


  O Music hast thou only heard
  The laughing river, the singing bird,
  The murmuring wind in the poplar-trees,--
  Nothing but Nature's melodies?
    Nay, thou hearest all her tones,
      As a Queen must hear!
      Sounds of wrath and fear,
      Mutterings, shouts, and moans,
    Mildness, tumult, and despair,--
    All she has that shakes the air
    With voices fierce and wild!
  Thou art a Queen and not a dreaming child,--
  Put on thy crown and let us hear thee reign
  Triumphant in a world of storm and strain!

    Echo the long-drawn sighs
  Of the mounting wind in the pines;
  And the sobs of the mounting waves that rise
    In the dark of the troubled deep
  To break on the beach in fiery lines.
    Echo the far-off roll of thunder,
        Rumbling loud
    And ever louder, under
    The blue-black curtain of cloud,
    Where the lightning serpents gleam,
      Echo the moaning
    Of the forest in its sleep
    Like a giant groaning
  In the torment of a dream.

    Now an interval of quiet
    For a moment holds the air
    In the breathless hush
    Of a silent prayer.

    Then the sudden rush
    Of the rain, and the riot
    Of the shrieking, tearing gale
    Breaks loose in the night,
    With a fusillade of hail!
    Hear the forest fight,
  With its tossing arms that crack and clash
    In the thunder's cannonade,
    While the lightning's forked flash
  Brings the old hero-trees to the ground with a crash!
  Hear the breakers' deepening roar,
    Driven like a herd of cattle
    In the wild stampede of battle,
  Trampling, trampling, trampling, to overwhelm the shore.

    Is it the end of all?
    Will the land crumble and fall?
    Nay, for a voice replies
    Out of the hidden skies,
  "Thus far, O sea, shalt thou go,
  So long, O wind, shalt thou blow:
  Return to your bounds and cease,
  And let the earth have peace!"

    O Music, lead the way--
      The stormy night is past,
  Lift up our heads to greet the day,
      And the joy of things that last.

    The dissonance and pain
      That mortals must endure
  Are changed in thine immortal strain
      To something great and pure.

    True love will conquer strife,
      And strength from conflict flows,
  For discord is the thorn of life
      And harmony the rose.


  May, 1916.





  FRANCE AND BELGIUM




  THE BELLS OF MALINES

  AUGUST 17, 1914


  The gabled roofs of old Malines
  Are russet red and gray and green,
  And o'er them in the sunset hour
  Looms, dark and huge, St. Rombold's tower.
  High in that rugged nest concealed,
  The sweetest bells that ever pealed,
  The deepest bells that ever rung,
  The lightest bells that ever sung,
  Are waiting for the master's hand
  To fling their music o'er the land.

  And shall they ring to-night, Malines?
  In nineteen hundred and fourteen,
  The frightful year, the year of woe,
  When fire and blood and rapine flow
  Across the land from lost Liege,
  Storm-driven by the German rage?
  The other carillons have ceased;
  Fallen is Hasselt, fallen Diesl,
  From Ghent and Bruges no voices come,
  Antwerp is silent, Brussels dumb!

  But in thy belfry, O Malines,
  The master of the bells unseen
  Has climbed to where the keyboard stands,--
  To-night his heart is in his hands!
  Once more, before invasion's hell
  Breaks round the tower he loves so well,
  Once more he strikes the well-worn keys,
  And sends aerial harmonies
  Far-floating through the twilight dim
  In patriot song and holy hymn.

  O listen, burghers of Malines!
  Soldier and workman, pale beguine.
  And mother with a trembling flock
  Of children clinging to thy frock,--
  Look up and listen, listen all!
  What tunes are these that gently fall
  Around you like a benison?
  "The Flemish Lion," "Brabanconne,"
  "O brave Liege," and all the airs
  That Belgium in her bosom bears.

  Ring up, ye silvery octaves high,
  Whose notes like circling swallows fly;
  And ring, each old sonorous bell,--
  "Jesu," "Maria," "Michael!"
  Weave in and out, and high and low,
  The magic music that you know,
  And let it float and flutter down
  To cheer the heart of the troubled town.
  Ring out, "Salvator," lord of all,--
  "Roland" in Ghent may hear thee call!

  O brave bell-music of Malines,
  In this dark hour how much you mean!
  The dreadful night of blood and tears
  Sweeps down on Belgium, but she hears
  Deep in her heart the melody
  Of songs she learned when she was free.
  She will not falter, faint, nor fail,
  But fight until her rights prevail
  And all her ancient belfries ring
  "The Flemish Lion," "God Save the King!"




  THE NAME OF FRANCE


  Give us a name to fill the mind
  With the shining thoughts that lead mankind,
  The glory of learning, the joy of art,--
  A name that tells of a splendid part.
  In long, long toil and the strenuous fight
  Of the human race to win its way
  From the feudal darkness into the day
  Of Freedom, Brotherhood, Equal Right,--
  A name like a star, a name of light.
  I give you _France_!

  Give us a name to stir the blood
  With a warmer glow and a swifter flood,
  At the touch of a courage that knows not fear,--
  A name like the sound of a trumpet, clear.
  And silver-sweet, and iron-strong,
  That calls three million men to their feet,
  Ready to march, and steady to meet
  The foes who threaten that name with wrong,--
  A name that rings like a battle-song.
  I give you _France_!

  Give us a name to move the heart
  With the strength that noble griefs impart,
  A name that speaks of the blood outpoured
  To save mankind from the sway of the sword,--
  A name that calls on the world to share
  In the burden of sacrificial strife
  When the cause at stake is the world's free life
  And the rule of the people everywhere,--
  A name like a vow, a name like a prayer.
  I give you _France_!

  The Hague, September, 1916.




  JEANNE D'ARC RETURNS

  1914 1916


  What hast thou done, O womanhood of France,
    Mother and daughter, sister, sweetheart, wife,
    What hast thou done, amid this fateful strife,
  To prove the pride of thine inheritance.
  In this fair land of freedom and romance?
    I hear thy voice with tears and courage rife,--
    Smiling against the swords that seek thy life--
  Make answer in a noble utterance:
  "I give France all I have, and all she asks.
    Would it were more! Ah, let her ask and take;
  My hands to nurse her wounded, do her tasks,--
    My feet to run her errands through the dark,--
  My heart to bleed in triumph for her sake,--
    And all my soul to follow thee, Jeanne d'Arc!"


  April 16, 1916.




  INTERLUDES IN HOLLAND




  THE HEAVENLY HILLS OF HOLLAND


  The heavenly hills of Holland,--
    How wondrously they rise
  Above the smooth green pastures
    Into the azure skies!
  With blue and purple hollows,
    With peaks of dazzling snow,
  Along the far horizon
    The clouds are marching slow,

  No mortal fool has trodden
    The summits of that range,
  Nor walked those mystic valleys
    Whose colors ever change;
  Yet we possess their beauty,
    And visit them in dreams,
  While the ruddy gold of sunset
    From cliff and canyon gleams.

  In days of cloudless weather
    They melt into the light;
  When fog and mist surround us
    They're hidden from our sight;
  But when returns a season
    Clear shining after rain,
  While the northwest wind is blowing,
    We see the hills again.

  The old Dutch painters loved them,
    Their pictures show them clear,--
  Old Hobbema and Ruysduel,
    Van Goyen and Vermeer,
  Above the level landscape,
    Rich polders, long-armed mills,
  Canals and ancient cities,--
    Float Holland's heavenly hills.


  The Hague, November, 1916.




  THE PROUD LADY


  When Staevoren town was in its prime
    And queened the Zuyder Zee,
  Its ships went out to every clime
    With costly merchantry.

  A lady dwelt in that rich town,
    The fairest in all the land;
  She walked abroad in a velvet gown,
    With many rings on her hand.

  Her hair was bright as the beaten gold,
    Her lips as coral red,
  Her roving eyes were blue and bold,
    And her heart with pride was fed.

  For she was proud of her father's ships,
    As she watched them gayly pass;
  And pride looked out of her eyes and lips
    When she saw herself in the glass.

  "Now come," she said to the captains ten,
    Who were ready to put to sea,
  "Ye are all my men and my father's men,
    And what will ye do for me?"

  "Go north and south, go east and west,
    And get me gifts," she said.
  "And he who bringeth me home the best,
    With that man will I wed."

  So they all fared forth, and sought with care
    In many a famous mart,
  For satins and silks and jewels rare,
    To win that lady's heart.

  She looked at them all with never a thought
    And careless put them by;
  "I am not fain of the things ye brought,
    Enough of these have I."

  The last that came was the head of the fleet,
    His name was Jan Borel;
  He bent his knee at the lady's feet,--
    In truth he loved her well.

  "I've brought thee home the best i' the world,
    A shipful of Danzig corn!"
  She stared at him long; her red lips curled,
    Her blue eyes filled with scorn.

  "Now out on thee, thou feckless kerl,
    A loon thou art," she said.
  "Am I a starving beggar girl?
    Shall I ever lack for bread?"

  "Go empty all thy sacks of grain
    Into the nearest sea,
  And never show thy face again
    To make a mock of me."

  Young Jan Borel, he answered naught,
    But in the harbor cast
  The sacks of golden corn he brought,
    And groaned when fell the last.

  Then Jan Borel, he hoisted sail,
    And out to sea he bore;
  He passed the Helder in a gale
    And came again no more.

  But the grains of corn went drifting down
    Like devil-scattered seed,
  To sow the harbor of the town
    With a wicked growth of weed.

  The roots were thick and the silt and sand
    Were gathered day by day,
  Till not a furlong out from land
    A shoal had barred the way.

  Then Staevoren town saw evil years,
    No ships could out or in.
  The boats lay rolling at the piers,
    And the mouldy grain in the bin.

  The grass-grown streets were all forlorn,
    The town in ruin stood,
  The lady's velvet gown was torn,
    Her rings were sold for food.

  Her father had perished long ago,
    But the lady held her pride.
  She walked with a scornful step and slow,
    Till at last in her rags she died.

  Yet still on the crumbling piers of the town,
    When the midnight moon shines free,
  A woman walks in a velvet gown
    And scatters corn in the sea.




  FLOOD-TIDE OF FLOWERS

  IN HOLLAND


  The laggard winter ebbed so slow
  With freezing rain and melting snow,
  It seemed as if the earth would stay
  Forever where the tide was low,
  In sodden green and watery gray.

  But now from depths beyond our sight,
  The tide is turning in the night,
  And floods of color long concealed
  Come silent rising toward the light,
  Through garden bare and empty field.

  And first, along the sheltered nooks,
  The crocus runs in little brooks
  Of joyance, till by light made bold
  They show the gladness of their looks
  In shining pools of white and gold.

  The tiny scilla, sapphire blue,
  Is gently sweeping in, to strew
  The earth with heaven; and sudden rills
  Of sunlit yellow, sweeping through,
  Spread into lakes of daffodils.

  The hyacinths, with fragrant heads,
  Have overflowed their sandy beds,
  And fill the earth with faint perfume,
  The breath that Spring around her sheds.
  And now the tulips break in bloom!

  A sea, a rainbow-tinted sea,
  A splendor and a mystery,
  Floods o'er the fields of faded gray:
  The roads are full of folks in glee,
  For lo,--to-day is Easter Day!


  April, 1916.




  ENTER AMERICA




  AMERICA'S PROSPERITY


  They tell me thou art rich, my country: gold
    In glittering flood has poured into thy chest;
    Thy flocks and herds increase, thy barns are pressed
  With harvest, and thy stores can hardly hold
  Their merchandise; unending trains are rolled
    Along thy network rails of East and West;
    Thy factories and forges never rest;
  Thou art enriched in all things bought and sold!

  But dost _thou_ prosper? Better news I crave.
    O dearest country, is it well with thee
      Indeed, and is thy soul in health?
  A nobler people, hearts more wisely brave,
    And thoughts that lift men up and make them free.--
      These are prosperity and vital wealth!


  The Hague, October 1, 1916.




  THE GLORY OF SHIPS


  The glory of ships is an old, old song,
    since the days when the sea-rovers ran
  In their open boats through the roaring surf,
    and the spread of the world began;
  The glory of ships is a light on the sea,
    and a star in the story of man.

  When Homer sang of the galleys of Greece
    that conquered the Trojan shore,
  And Solomon lauded the barks of Tyre that
    brought great wealth to his door,
  'Twas little they knew, those ancient men,
    what would come of the sail and the oar.

  The Greek ships rescued the West from the East,
    when they harried the Persians home;
  And the Roman ships were the wings of strength
    that bore up the empire, Rome;
  And the ships or Spain found a wide new world
    far over the fields of foam.

  Then the tribes of courage at last saw clear
    that the ocean was not a bound,
  But a broad highway, and a challenge to seek
    for treasure as yet unfound;
  So the fearless ships fared forth to the search,
    in joy that the globe was round.

  Their hulls were heightened, their sails spread out.
    they grew with the growth of their quest;
  They opened the secret doors of the East,
    and the golden gates of the West;
  And many a city of high renown
    was proud of a ship on its crest.

  The fleets of England and Holland and France
    were at strife with each other and Spain;
  And battle and storm sent a myriad ships
    to sleep in the depths of the main;
  But the seafaring spirit could never be drowned,
    and it filled up the fleets again.

  They greatened and grew, with the aid of steam,
    to a wonderful, vast array,
  That carries the thoughts and the traffic of men
    into every harbor and bay;
  And now in the world-wide work of the ships
    'tis England that leads the way.

  O well for the leading that follows the law
    of a common right on the sea!
  But ill for the leader who tries to hold
    what belongs to mankind in fee!
  The way of the ships is an open way,
    and the ocean must ever be free!

  Remember, O first of the maritime folk,
    how the rise of your greatness began.
  It will live if you safeguard the round-the-world road
    from the shame of a selfish ban;
  For the glory of ships is a light on the sea,
    and a star in the story of man!


  September 12, 1916.




  MARE LIBERUM


  I

  You dare to say with perjured lips,
  "We fight to make the ocean free"?
  _You_, whose black trail of butchered ships
  Bestrews the bed of every sea
  Where German submarines have wrought
  Their horrors! Have you never thought,--
  What you call freedom, men call piracy!


  II

  Unnumbered ghosts that haunt the wave,
  Where you have murdered, cry you down;
  And seamen whom you would not save,
  Weave now in weed grown depths a crown
  Of shame for your imperious head,--
  A dark memorial of the dead,--
  Women and children whom you sent to drown.


  III

  Nay, not till thieves are set to guard
  The gold, and corsairs called to keep
  O'er peaceful commerce watch and ward
  And wolves do herd the helpless sheep,
  Shall men and women look to thee,
  Thou ruthless Old Man of the Sea,
  To safeguard law and freedom on the deep!


  IV

  In nobler breeds we put our trust;
  The nations in whose sacred lore
  The "Ought" stands out above the "Must,"
  And honor rules in peace and war.
  With these we hold in soul and heart,
  With these we choose our lot and part,
  Till Liberty is safe on sea and shore.


  _London Times_, February 12, 1917.




  "LIBERTY ENLIGHTENING THE WORLD"


  Thou warden of the western gate, above Manhattan Bay,
  The fogs of doubt that hid thy face are driven clean away:
  Thine eyes at last look far and clear, thou liftest high thy hand
  To spread the light of liberty world-wide for every land.

  No more thou dreamest of a peace reserved alone for thee,
  While friends are fighting for thy cause beyond the guardian sea;
  The battle that they wage is thine; thou fallest if they fall;
  The swollen flood of Prussian pride will sweep unchecked o'er all.

  O cruel is the conquer-lust in Hohenzollern brains;
  The paths they plot to gain their goal are dark with shameful stains:
  No faith they keep, no law revere, no god but naked Might;--
  They are the foemen of mankind. Up, Liberty; and smite!

  Britain, and France, and Italy, and Russia newly born,
  Have waited for thee in the night. Oh, come as comes the morn!
  Serene and strong and full of faith, America, arise,
  With steady hope and mighty help to join thy brave Allies.

  O dearest country of my heart, home of the high desire,
  Make clean thy soul for sacrifice on Freedom's altar-fire;
  For thou must suffer, thou must fight, until the war-lords cease,
  And all the peoples lift their heads in liberty and peace.


  _London Times_, April 12, 1917.




  THE OXFORD THRUSHES

  FEBRUARY, 1917


  I never thought again to hear
  The Oxford thrushes singing clear,
  Amid the February rain,
  Their sweet, indomitable strain.

  A wintry vapor lightly spreads
  Among the trees, and round the beds
  Where daffodil and jonquil sleep,
  Only the snowdrop wakes to weep.

  It is not springtime yet. Alas,
  What dark, tempestuous days must pass,
  Till England's trial by battle cease,
  And summer comes again with peace.

  The lofty halls, the tranquil towers,
  Where Learning in untroubled hours
  Held her high court, serene in fame,
  Are lovely still, yet not the same.

  The novices in fluttering gown
  No longer fill the ancient town,
  But fighting men in khaki drest--
  And in the Schools the wounded rest.

  Ah, far away, 'neath stranger skies
  Full many a son of Oxford lies,
  And whispers from his warrior grave,
  "I died to keep the faith you gave."

  The mother mourns, but does not fail,
  Her courage and her love prevail
  O'er sorrow, and her spirit hears
  The promise of triumphant years.

  Then sing, ye thrushes, in the rain
  Your sweet, indomitable strain.
  Ye bring a word from God on high
  And voices in our hearts reply.




  HOMEWARD BOUND


  Home, for my heart still calls me;
    Home, through the danger zone;
  Home, whatever befalls me,
    I will sail again to my own!

  Wolves of the sea are hiding
    Closely along the way,
  Under the water biding
    Their moment to rend and slay.

  Black is the eagle that brands them,
    Black are their hearts as the night,
  Black is the hate that sends them
    To murder but not to fight.

  Flower of the German Culture,
    Boast of the Kaiser's Marine,
  Choose for your emblem the vulture,
    Cowardly, cruel, obscene!

  Forth from her sheltered haven
    Our peaceful ship glides slow,
  Noiseless in flight as a raven,
    Gray as a hoodie crow.

  She doubles and turns in her bearing,
    Like a twisting plover she goes;
  The way of her westward faring
    Only the captain knows.

  In a lonely bay concealing
    She lingers for days, and slips
  At dusk from her covert, stealing
    Thro' channels feared by the ships.

  Brave are the men, and steady,
    Who guide her over the deep,--
  British mariners, ready
    To face the sea-wolf's leap.

  Lord of the winds and waters,
    Bring our ship to her mark,
  Safe from this game of hide-and-seek
    With murderers in the dark!


  On the S.S. _Baltic_, May, 1917.












End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Flower, by Henry Van Dyke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED FLOWER ***

***** This file should be named 9388.txt or 9388.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/3/8/9388/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Tonya Allen and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
