The Project Gutenberg EBook of Government by the Brewers?, by Adolph Keitel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Government by the Brewers?

Author: Adolph Keitel

Posting Date: October 14, 2012 [EBook #9406]
Release Date: December, 2005
First Posted: September 29, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVERNMENT BY THE BREWERS? ***




Produced by Bruce D. Thomas











GOVERNMENT BY THE BREWERS?

By ADOLPH KEITEL

For thirty years intimately associated with the brewing industry








CONTENTS.

Chapter

        Preface

        Ballot Box (Illustration.)

 I.     My thirty years' intimate association with the brewers

 II.    Prohibition banishes crime

 III.   What is beer?

 IV.    Non-alcoholic beer is a mysterious compound of drugs

 V.     Beer is a habit forming drug

 VI.    Why beer is not a fit drink for the home

 VII.   Beer is not a temperance drink

 VIII.  The decreased alcoholic content of beer will increase drunkenness

 IX.    Brewers' grains are considered dangerous for cows milk

 X.     Brewers assault distillers to hide their own crimes

 XI.    Abolition of crime and vice would decrease the sale of beer

 XII.   Crime is planned in saloons

 XIII.  The beer traffic does not recognize the sanctity of the home

 XIV.   A vice complaint

        An every-day vice scene (Illustration)

 XV.    Laws are openly violated

 XVI.   Another vice backed by brewers

        Cabarets and tango dance resorts

        How a New York brewer advertises his cabaret resort

 XVII.  Millions expended in corrupting elections

        United States Brewers' Association exposed

 XVIII. How Chicago Brewers have tried to prevent a "dry" vote

 XIX.   Brewers fear woman suffrage

 XX.    People resent government by the brewers





PREFACE.

When it was found impossible to suppress my writings by attempts
to bribe me, men were hired to poison me.  After the failure of
this plot to dispose of me, I was subjected to almost unbelievable
insults, persecution, humiliation and injustice in the courts.

A friendly federal judge was besought to stop me by an injunction.
The United States Circuit Court of Appeals set it aside.

Four futile attempts were made to influence the Post Office
authorities to deny me the use of the mails.

I was twice presented with the alternative of either agreeing to
stop the publication of the truth or being thrown into jail on
"framed" libel charges.  I chose the jail rather than renounce the
right of the freedom of the press guaranteed me by the constitution
of my country.

When even the jail could not silence me, a diabolical attempt was
made to bury me alive in an institution for the insane, but when
it was found impossible to discover the slightest trace of insanity,
or drive me insane during a sojourn of a month among maniacs, I
was released.

I verily believe that the honesty of the alienists in charge of the
institution alone saved me from a living death.




THE AUTHOR


[Illustration: A Menace to good Government]


"_The very nature of the business of the brewer makes it imperative
that they retain a strong hold on the ballot box.  By those methods
alone have they been able to exist in the past.  By those methods
alone, can they hope to save themselves_"




CHAPTER I.

MY THIRTY YEARS' INTIMATE ASSOCIATION WITH THE BREWERS


For about thirty years I have been closely allied with the brewing
industry and was daily brought in contact with the brewers.

I have been interested in a number of breweries as a stockholder.
I have been intimately associated with many brewers throughout the
country.  I am therefore thoroughly familiar with the inner history
of the beer business and the political corruption, crime, vice and
degeneracy closely interwoven therewith.




CHAPTER II.

PROHIBITION BANISHES CRIME


Naturally, I am not a prohibitionist. Nevertheless, I dispute the
contention of the brewers that they did not oppose but, instead,
actually approved the enactment of the recent "bone-dry" prohibition
legislation forbidding transportation of alcoholic beverages into
states which prohibit the sale and manufacture of intoxicants, on
the ground that its drastic measure would have a "reactionary effect"
and thus result in the return of a number of the present "dry" states
into the "wet" column.  Vaporings of this sort sound very much like
the old sour grape story and have their origin in the fertile brain
of the publicity manager of the beer trust.

Absence of drunkenness, law and order, and the reduction of crime
to a minimum, have invariably followed the "dry" wave.

Prohibition has emptied the jails, and the people are gratified
with the new order of things.  Everybody is happy except the
liquor interests.

A town in Georgia, having no further use for its jail, not having
had an occupant for a long time as the result of the bone-dry law,
has rented it out for another purpose.

The most remarkable proof comes from the national capital.  Washington
became saloonless on November 1, 1917.  During the month of November--the
first dry month--official figures made public by the commissioners,
comparing arrests for drunkenness during November, 1917, and the same
month a year ago, show that during November, 1917, 199 arrests for
drunkenness were made, as against 838 for November, 1916, a reduction
of 639, or 76 per cent.  The greatest number of arrests for any one
week in November, 1917, were 61, while the greatest number for the
same period a year ago were 218.

In Decatur, Ill., which went "dry" four years ago, the population
has increased from 25,000 to 45,000.  It is claimed that the criminal
cases have lessened 90 per cent, that the building of factories
and houses has increased 30 per cent, that 2,700 savings depositors
in banks were added and that there were 37 per cent less cases of
public charity yearly.

Nor will the loss of revenue permanently affect conditions.  The
enormous wealth of the country will soon adjust that phase of the
situation.

Authorities assert there is no license city that keeps within its
budget, whereas there is no dry city that is not financially
improved by the ousting of the brewers.




CHAPTER III.

WHAT IS BEER?


In the well known European beer drinking countries nothing but hops
and malt are permitted in brewing.

Here beer is a concoction of corn, rice, hops, malt, glucose,
preservatives and other drugs--and, in most cases, it has nothing
in common with real beer other than its artificial foam and color.

A leader of public opinion made the statement in the United States
Senate that "Beer that is brewed in this country is slop.  They say
it is 'good for the health.' I never saw a man who drank it who was
not a candidate for Bright's disease or paralysis."

Mr. J. Frank Hanly, editor of the National Enquirer (Indianapolis),
and former Governor of Indiana says: "Nor will the people be deceived
by the fallacious contention that beer is a safe and harmless drink.
Every laboratory in America refutes it.  Every sociologist knows
better.  Every scientist of reputation condemns it.  The management
of every great industrial interest, compelled by economic necessity,
seeks its complete overthrow."



"_The average beer drinker consumes more alcohol than the average
whiskey drinker_"




CHAPTER IV.

NON-ALCOHOLIC BEER IS A MYSTERIOUS COMPOUND OF DRUGS


Numerous Processes are now in use for making non-alcoholic beer
and the ingredients used are usually cloaked in deep mystery.

In a recently patented process for the production of non-alcoholic
beer it is admitted that salt, gum arabic, quassia, a pepsin compound
and meta-bisulphite of potassium, or another suitable drug, are some
of the materials used in brewing the non-alcoholic product.




CHAPTER V.

BEER IS A HABIT FORMING DRUG


Eminent physicians ridicule the claim of the brewers that beer,
even assuming that it were pure and unadulterated--and entirely
free from poisonous drugs and chemicals--is a beverage of high
food value and ranks with milk as a blood producer.

A bulletin issued by the Department of Health of the City of New York
in relation to the question of alcohol as food states that ten cents
worth of beer provides 240 calories of food energy, while ten cents
worth of oatmeal will provide 3,720 calories.

There is no question that the indulgence in beer is merely an
acquired habit.  To those who have not cultivated it, its taste
is generally repugnant.

Total abstinence for a while invariably cures the habit.  I have
been told by a number of former strong adherents to the cause of
the brewers, residing in territory now "dry", that even they are
wondering why they ever saturated their systems with beer.  Physicians
condemn its use and claim that the widespread idea that alcohol is
a stimulant is wrong.  Beer is fast becoming an outcast.

Fresh fruit juices, notably grape juice and apple cider, and other
satisfying beverages, well flavored, with a considerable food value,
are daily growing more popular and will take the place of beer.



"_To rid the saloon of crime and vice would decrease the sale of beer_"




CHAPTER VI.

WHY BEER IS NOT A FIT DRINK FOR THE HOME


The alcoholic content of beer has been about four per cent.  The
alcoholic content of the quality of whiskey generally sold over
the bar is about forty per cent--and  frequently much less.  It
can therefore be readily seen that the quantity of alcohol contained
in a large glass of beer, even with the recent slightly reduced
alcoholic content, is equivalent to about that contained in an
ordinary drink of whiskey, which is sufficient to intoxicate any
person not accustomed to its use.

It is nothing unusual, even in the case of confirmed drinkers, to
feel at times the intoxicating effect of a single glass of beer,
especially when taken upon an empty stomach or when the system may
not just be in proper condition.

Brewers are recommending beer to expectant and nursing mothers and
as a fit drink for the home.  But, on the other hand, they prefer
to employ men who have not acquired the beer drinking habit.

The most valuable men advocating the "wet" cause fight shy of beer.
They know what it is made of.  Many saloonkeepers never touch it,
nor will they employ bartenders unless they are total abstainers.



"_If the saloons and other public drinking places were ousted,
but the breweries permitted to operate, drunkenness, crime and
vice would invade the home_"




CHAPTER VII.

BEER IS NOT A TEMPERANCE DRINK


It can not be denied that people drink beer for its alcoholic
effect--and that most of the intoxication is caused by beer.

Brewers claim that beer is a "true temperance drink," but they
are careful to add--if taken in moderate quantities.

If beer were ever consumed in moderate quantities it would result
in a fifty per cent reduction of the beer output of the country.
It would force most of the brewers out of business--and I doubt
if any saloon could earn enough money to pay the rent of the place.
For that reason brewers can not afford to encourage the enactment
of laws abolishing "treating," despite their public statements that
they are in favor of its suppression.

In discussing the question with an acquaintance whom I know to be
a very moderate drinker of beer only, he advanced the much heard
argument that a glass of beer will harm no one.  He said that he
occasionally dropped into a saloon to take a glass of beer.  When
I asked him if, when he had gone into a saloon he had ever run
across some friends and, to be a good fellow, he had been obliged
to take a number of glasses, he replied "yes"--and that they had
made him drunk.


"_Brewers can not afford to abolish 'treating'_"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DECREASED ALCOHOLIC CONTENT OF BEER WILL INCREASE DRUNKENNESS


The decree of President Wilson that beer brewed henceforth in the
United States during the pendency of the war shall not contain more
than 2.75 per cent alcohol by weight, which is equivalent to
3.4 per cent by volume,[Footnote: _This does not include ale and
porter, the alcoholic content of which is permitted to remain
considerably in excess of that of beer_.] and that the amount of
grain used in its manufacture shall be reduced to approximately
seventy per cent of the volume used heretofore, will not decrease
intoxication, but it has caused intense jubilation among the
brewers.  They pronounce it a great victory over the "dry" forces,
and they have lost no time in again broadly proclaiming the virtues
of their product and its "food" value.

The slightly reduced alcoholic content of beer will still be ample
to produce a high state of intoxication if, as is usually the case,
it is consumed immoderately.  In substantiation of my contention I
need but cite the irrefutable fact that a barrel of beer holding
31 gallons would still contain a whole gallon of alcohol.

Where the great danger lies is that the widely heralded reduction
of the alcoholic content and the claim of the brewers that beer
is now to be classed as a true temperance drink will tend to greatly
deceive the public and thus largely increase its consumption, in
most cases to cause "the same intoxicating effect as before."

Besides, it has already become a common practice among many misguided
drinkers to produce the desired "kick" by pouring whiskey, and even
plain alcohol into the beer.

In my opinion, therefore, the reduced alcoholic content will make
the consumption of beer still more harmful than before, because,
instead of diminishing drunkenness, it will have the opposite
effect--and the brewers will be the big gainers because the new
order of things will not only largely increase their output, but
it will also reduce the cost of production without cutting the
selling price.  And, by reason of their increased output, they
will use the same amount of grain as before.

Even with the reduced alcoholic content the beer drinker will consume
more alcohol than the whiskey drinker.




CHAPTER IX.

BREWERS' GRAINS ARE CONSIDERED DANGEROUS FOR COWS'MILK


As an argument against the extermination of the breweries the claim
is made that a part of the grain used in brewing is converted into
a cattle feed which is a great "milk producer."

Brewers' grains are the residue of barley malt and corn grits.
They consist principally of barley hulls.

Corn stalks are also fed to cattle, but they have very little
food value without a considerable addition of whole grain.  Brewers'
grains, as a milk producer, are a very poor substitute for the
grain from which beer is brewed.

Authorities claim that brewers' grains produce functional disturbances
and disease in the cow--and milk from such cows is not safe for infants.

Brewers' grains are not allowed to be used for the cows that yield milk
and butter for Copenhagen, the capital of the country that leads
the world in dairy farming.


"_The closing of the breweries can alone remove the objectionable
conditions inseparable from the beer traffic_"




CHAPTER X.

BREWERS ASSAULT DISTILLERS TO HIDE THEIR OWN CRIMES


A nation-wide campaign has been set in motion by the brewers to
beguile the public by assaulting the distillers.

Distillers rarely sell direct to saloons as the brewers do.

Distillers do not own or back saloons.

Distillers are therefore not responsible for the lawless conditions
of which the public complains--nor were they ever accused of stuffing
the ballot box.

Whiskey leaves the distillery in an unadulterated condition, while
beer is drugged at the brewery.

The average beer drinker consumes more alcohol than the average
whiskey drinker.

The National Advocate (New York) maintains that "beer is a greater
peril to manhood, home and society than whiskey ever has been or
can be."

Are the attacks upon the distillers merely a ruse to conceal the
fact that officers, directors and thousands of stockholders of the
largest brewing companies in all parts of the country are either
wholesale or retail whiskey dealers, or saloon keepers, or both?

If the brewers are sincere in their promise to divorce beer from
whiskey, why have they not closed their own whiskey stores?

Why have they not placed a ban upon the sale of whiskey in all the
saloons which they own and operate themselves?

Why have they not forbidden the sale of whiskey in all saloons?
What is there to prevent it?

Is it not a fact that, with few exceptions, the so-called owners
of saloons, not operated by brewers themselves, are merely slaves
of the brewers, the latter owning either the property or the lease,
the license and a chattel mortgage upon the fixtures in the place?

The truth is that a saloon keeper can not exist if his business
should be restricted to the sale of beer--and the closing of a
saloon means a loss to the brewer.

I quote here again from an editorial written by Mr. J. Frank Hanly,
former Governor of Indiana, which appeared in the National Enquirer
(Indianapolis), of which he is the editor, as follows:

"When the writer of this editorial was a candidate for the nomination
for Governor of the State of Indiana it was not the distilling
interests of the State, but the brewers, that sought to wring from
him a promise that in consideration for his nomination he should, if
elected, permit no temperance legislation during his term.  It was
the brewing interests of Indiana, not the distillers, that sought
on the eve of election, after his nomination in spite of their
opposition, to extort a like promise as the price of his election.

"It was the president of the Indiana Brewers' Association, and not
a representative of the distillery interests of the State, that
walked into the Governor's office in Indianapolis, and with the
arrogance of a Hun announced that he had come to say to the Governor
that a township and ward remonstrance law which the governor had
recommended to the General Assembly for enactment could not be
passed by the legislature. . . . .

"In all the history of the political and civil life of the American
people there has been no combination or organization of power so
brutal, so domineering, so corrupt, or so dead to every sense of
civic interest or concern as the brewers of America. They have been
and are the chief criminals, and no camouflage to which they may
resort will save them.  The people will see beneath the false
pretense the bare, naked facts.  The legislatures of the States
will be organized into firing squads, and the beer trade will be
compelled to meet its fate."




CHAPTER XI.

ABOLITION OF CRIME AND VICE WOULD DECREASE THE SALE OF BEER


Because brewers control the saloons, it is also within their power
to suppress "treating," stop the operation of disorderly hotels
and private drinking rooms in conjunction with saloons, stop
bookmaking and other forms of gambling, in short, remove any and
all of the undesirable features connected with the saloon which
are objected to by the public--but any serious disturbance with
existing conditions would decrease the sale of beer.




CHAPTER XII.

CRIME IS PLANNED IN SALOONS


The brewers know that the saloons are the meeting places of
lawbreakers and disreputables, that they enter the side doors
leading to private rooms where burglaries, holdups and other crimes
are planned and the booty is divided--yet, brewers will make no real
effort to improve these conditions.

Is it surprising that the public is clamoring for the complete
elimination of the breweries?




CHAPTER XIII.

THE BEER TRAFFIC DOES NOT RECOGNIZE THE SANCTITY OF THE HOME


On the other hand, if the saloons and other public drinking places
were ousted but the breweries permitted to operate, drunkenness,
crime and vice would invade the home.

If the people are determined to remove the objectionable elements
inseparable from the beer traffic, they must close the breweries.




CHAPTER XIV.

A VICE COMPLAINT


The Juvenile Protective Association of Chicago filed the following
complaint with the Chief of Police:

"Schoenhofen's Hall

"One of the waiters serving drinks was no older than 14 years.  At
midnight this boy was sitting at one of the tables half asleep
trying to support a drunken man.  Fifty minors were illegally present.
Ten minors drank intoxicants.  Three minors were intoxicated.
Twenty soldiers were drinking intoxicants.  About fifteen soldiers
were intoxicated.  One of the soldiers dancing was so drunk that
the girl could hardly hold him up.  There were four instances of
kissing, five of embracing, three of improper handling, and one fight."

_The Peter Schoenhofen Brewing Company operates the largest brewery
in Chicago_.


[Illustration: AN EVERY-DAY VICE SCENE]


[Blank page]




CHAPTER XV.

LAWS ARE OPENLY VIOLATED


I want to say here, however, that not all the brewers are as black
as they are painted.  There are some among them who are clean and
honest men who, bitterly resent the lawless methods of their colleagues.

Upon the request of the respectable element I have frequently
warned the brewers of the country that nothing could save their
industry unless they made up their minds to become law abiding
citizens and stop fooling the people.

I have warned them on many occasions that they had no right to
enlist the sympathy of the people as long as they persisted in
defying the laws enacted by the people, but my warnings fell upon
deaf ears.

What can cause greater hostility toward the brewers than the fact
that midnight closing and Sunday laws are openly violated with their
knowledge and connivance and that political influence and the liberal
use of money will gain them immunity from prosecution?

Has it not frequently been said that the "dough bags" of the brewers
control the courts and influence their decisions?


_"Absence of drunkenness, law and order, and the reduction of
crime to a minimum, have invariably followed the 'dry' wave"_




CHAPTER XVI.

ANOTHER VICE BACKED BY BREWERS



CABARETS
AND TANGO DANCE RESORTS


How little my advice was heeded was clearly shown by, the appearance
of a comparatively new vice--openly aided and abetted by brewers--which
in a few years has spread its poisonous tentacles to all parts
of the country.  I refer to


CABARETS AND TANGO DANCE RESORTS


What more can inflame the mind of the public against the brewers
than these vulgar and liquor flowing twentieth century dives,
especially when the fact is considered that many of these gilded
hells are owned and operated by brewers themselves?

In many European cities similar resorts are classed among houses
of ill repute and the same police regulations are applied to them.
Here, they are brazenly advertised as "afternoon teas" to lure
the unwary.

In my travels I have visited many of the most prominently
advertised places of this kind in different parts of the country
to study the habitues.

It can not be denied that most of these dives are the rendezvous
of the demimonde, breeding places of vice, crime and degeneracy,
and an ally of the white slave traffic.

They are keeping the divorce mills busy.  Their glitter has led
astray, caused the disappearance of and has driven to suicide
innumerable young women, particularly from among those who have
come from rural districts to seek employment in large cities.
They have made criminals of many young men because their salaries
would not permit them to lead the fast life of their newly made friends.

The principal source of profit to the keepers of these dives is,
of course, the sale of alcoholic drinks--in most cases grossly
adulterated despite the unreasonable prices exacted for same.

Female performers are frequently expected to drink with the patrons.
Usually these women are paid a commission on the drinks they can
persuade their dupes to purchase.

Scenes of indecency are openly indulged in by both sexes as the
result of the excessive consumption of alcoholic drinks.

A recent development of the cabaret is the "hostess."  Her duty
is to "introduce" men and girls.  In many instances hotels of
questionable character are operated as an adjunct to these places.

The managers of a number of large hotels which have built up a
reputation for respectability and exclusiveness have long ago seen
the handwriting on the wall and therefore wisely placed a ban upon
this evil.  Ladies refuse to stop at hotels that attract an undesirable
element by the operation of cabarets and present-day dances.

The fact that many of these places which are owned and operated
by brewers themselves continue in full blast again discredits the
statements of their press agents that "the cabaret must go."

Will the brewers continue their policy of defying the people until
nation-wide prohibition will put a stop to these drunken orgies?


How a New York Brewer Advertises His Cabaret Resort


The following advertisement appeared in


_The New York Times_:


[Illustration: _John Reisenweber, the keeper of this resort, is
a well known brewer. He is President of the Excelsior Brewing Company,
Borough of Brooklyn, City of New York_.]




CHAPTER XVII.

MILLIONS EXPENDED IN CORRUPTING ELECTIONS



UNITED STATES BREWERS' ASSOCIATION EXPOSED


I have also many times urged the brewers to break away from their
national organization, the United States Brewers' Association--also
known as the Brewers Trust--because I felt convinced that
they would sooner or later lay themselves open to exposure and
criminal prosecution, and that it would further increase the
hostility toward their industry if they should persist in their
attempts to defeat the prohibition movement by the expenditure
of money in corrupting elections, legislation and public officials.

Political contributions amounting to many millions of dollars,
based upon the annual output of brewers throughout the country,
are turned into their association.

Other enormous sums are collected from those who sell to brewers.
They are expected to join a "league of manufacturers and dealers"
organized to fight prohibition.  From invoices rendered to brewers
for goods purchased a certain amount is retained.

Officials of the United States Brewers' Association declare that
checkbooks, bank passbooks, checks, stubs and correspondence are
destroyed monthly, and that the only record left is the money the
association has in bank.

That my warnings were justified was amply proven when, not long ago,
the large brewing companies in the state of Texas were indicted
charging them with the distribution of many millions of dollars to
promote anti-prohibition legislation and the payment of the poll
taxes of thousands of persons so that they could vote against
prohibition.  All of these breweries except one pleaded guilty
to the charges against them and paid penalties aggregating $276,000,
also expenses incurred by the Attorney General's office, totaling
about $10,000, and the court costs, and they accepted an injunction
restraining them from violating the state anti-trust laws and
contributing to political campaigns in the future.

One hundred large brewing companies in the State of Pennsylvania,
and officers of the United States Brewers' Association, were
indicted by a Federal Grand Jury, charging conspiracy in the
unlawful expenditure of money to influence elections at which
votes for federal officials were cast.

The office of the United States Brewers' Association in the City
of New York was raided and its files were seized.  The secretary
of the association was committed to jail.

It was alleged that these brewers raised and spent a fund exceeding
$1,000,000, to influence the election of a United States senator
and thirty-six members of the lower House of Congress and to pervert
to selfish and sordid purposes the government of the nation.

The United States Attorney charged in court that these brewers had
boasted in their circulars of their ability to poison the ranks of
organized labor through labor unions, to kill at one session of
Congress two hundred bills inimical to the liquor interests, and
to capture entire states at elections.

Fines aggregating $50,000 were imposed upon thirty-three of these
brewing companies. The United States Brewers' Association was fined
$10,000--the maximum amount possible under the Federal law.

Federal authorities have hinted at a nation-wide traffic in election
corruption.  Intimations have come from the same source that similar
indictments may be handed down against brewers in all parts of the country.

But even the scandalous exposures in Texas and Pennsylvania will not
stop their interference with elections.

The truth is that the very nature of the business of the brewers
makes it imperative that they retain a strong hold on the ballot
box.  By those methods alone have they been able to exist in the
past.  By those methods alone can they hope to save themselves.

In New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, the mere suggestion to
keepers of saloons, hotels and other places where liquor is sold
that the "dry" wave may soon put them out of business usually
brings forth the reply: "Our state will never go 'dry.'  The brewers
have too much money.  They can buy all the votes required, as well
as public officials, to kill any legislation hostile to them."




CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW CHICAGO BREWERS HAVE
TRIED TO PREVENT A "DRY"
VOTE


In Chicago, heretofore considered by the brewers one of their
greatest strongholds, in order to enable the people to vote whether
the city shall remain "wet" or become "dry," the law requires the
filing of a petition with a certain number of signatures, but the
brewers opposed even the right of the people to vote upon this
important question and in glaring advertisements boldly advised
them to withhold their signatures.

Attempts were also made to intimidate the circulators of the
petitions by threatening them with prosecution for perjury unless
they personally knew that all the signers were registered voters.

In spite of these methods, 148,802 signatures were obtained,
42,302 more than the 106,500 names required under the law.

Attempts made by politicians to defer the election for a year on
the plea of "economy" were also unsuccessful.  In many quarters
same was branded as another ruse on the part of the brewers to
prevent a "dry" vote.


"_The beer traffic does not recognize the sanctity of the home_"




CHAPTER XIX.

BREWERS FEAR
WOMAN SUFFRAGE


Women know that the abolition of the beer traffic will prevent
their children from becoming drunkards and criminals.

Women know that the abolition of the beer traffic means a full
pay envelope on Saturday--a happier home--and more food and clothes
for them and their children.

Women know that in the states where the beer traffic has been
ousted, wage earners who formerly spent the greater part of their
earnings in saloons have, since the advent of the "dry" wave,
invested their savings in a house and lot, and in a few years
were able to pay off the entire indebtedness--and now are masters
of their own home.

That's the reason why brewers greatly fear the votes of women and
why they consider woman suffrage the stepping stone to prohibition.




CHAPTER XX.

PEOPLE RESENT GOVERNMENT BY
THE BREWERS


It is not the beer traffic alone, but the social and political
crimes of the brewers, which is leading to rapid prohibitory laws
all over the country.

People resent government by the brewers.  People resent the election
of legislators and other public officials, city, state and national,
to serve ends hostile to social decency, to rule by the people, to
the very life of the nation.










End of Project Gutenberg's Government by the Brewers?, by Adolph Keitel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVERNMENT BY THE BREWERS? ***

***** This file should be named 9406.txt or 9406.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/4/0/9406/

Produced by Bruce D. Thomas

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
