Project Gutenberg's Four Girls and a Compact, by Annie Hamilton Donnell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Four Girls and a Compact

Author: Annie Hamilton Donnell

Posting Date: February 5, 2015 [EBook #9505]
Release Date: December, 2005
First Posted: October 7, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR GIRLS AND A COMPACT ***




Produced by Joel Erickson, David Garcia and PG Distributed Proofreaders









FOUR GIRLS AND A COMPACT

By Annie Hamilton Donnell


1908.



CHAPTER I.


"Wait for T.O.," commanded Loraine, and of course they waited. Loraine's
commands were always obeyed, Laura Ann said, because her name was such a
_queeny_ one. Nobody else in the little colony--the "B-Hive"--had a
queeny name.

"Though I just missed it," sighed Laura Ann. "Think what a little step
from Loraine to Laur' Ann! I always just miss things."

T.O. was apt to be late. She never rode, and, being short, was not a
remarkable walker. To-night she was later than usual. The three other
girls got into kimonos and slippers and prepared tea. In all their minds
the Grand Plan was fomenting, and it was not easy to wait. A cheer
greeted T.O. as she came in, wet and weary and cheerful.

"You're overdue, my dear," Loraine said severely. But of course T.O.
laughed and offered a weak pun:

"The 'dew' is over me, you mean! Oh, girls, this looks too cozy for
anything in here! All the way up town I've been blessing you three for
taking me in."

Said Laura Ann: "If I were pun-mad, like some folks, I could do
something quite smart there. But there, you poor, wet dear! You sha'n't
be outdone in your specialty, no you sha'n't! Get off your things quick,
dear--we're all bursting to talk about the Grand Plan."

It was, after all, Billy that started in. Billy was very tired indeed,
and her lean, eager face was pale.

"Girls, we _must!_" she said. "I can't hold out more than a few
weeks more. I shall be a mental wreck and go 'round muttering,
_one_-two--three--four, _one_--two--three--four--flat your b's,
sharp your c's--one--two--three--four--_play!_" For Billy all day
toiled at pianos, teaching unwilling little persons to play. Billy's
long name was Wilhelmina.

They were all toilers--worker-B's. The "B" part of the name which they
had given to the little colony came from the accident of all their
surnames beginning with that letter--Brown, Bent, Baker, Byers. It was,
they all agreed, a happy accident; the "B-Hive" sounded so well. But,
as Laura Ann said, it entailed things, notably industry.

Laura Ann finished negatives part of the day to earn money to learn to
paint the other part. She was poor, but the same good grit that made her
loyal to her old grandmother's name, unshortened and unbeautified, gave
her courage to work on toward the distant goal.

Loraine taught--"just everlastingly taught," she said, until she could
do it with her eyes shut. Cube root, all historic dates, all x, y, z's,
were as printing to her, dinned into the warp and woof of her by patient
reiteration. She was very tired, too. The rest of the long June days
stretched ahead of her in weary perspective.

That these three had drifted together in the great city was sufficiently
curious, but more curious yet was the "drifting together" of T.O.--a
plain little clerk in a great department store. She, herself, humbly
acknowledged that she did not seem to "belong," but here she was,
divesting herself of her wet wraps and getting ready for tea in the tiny
flat. Handkerchiefs, initialed, "warranted,"--uninitialed,
unwarranted--were behind her and ahead, but between she forgot their
existence and took her comfort.

"Well?" she said presently. "I'm ready." They sat down to the simple
little meal without further delay and with the first mouthfuls opened
again the rather time-worn discussion. Could they adopt the Grand Plan?
Oh, _couldn't_ they? To get out of the hot, teeming city and
breathe air enough and pure enough, to luxuriate in idleness, to
_rest_--to a girl, they longed for it. They were all orphans, and
they were all poor. The Grand Plan was ambitious, indefinite, but they
could not give it up. They had wintered it and springed it, and clung
to it through bright days and dark.

Suddenly Loraine tapped sharply on the table. "All in favor of spending
the summer in the country say 'aye,'" she cried, "and say it hard!"

"Aye!"

"Aye!"

"Aye!"

"_Aye_!" appended Loraine, and said it hard. "It's a vote," she
added calmly. Then, staring at each other, they sat for a little with
rather frightened faces. For this thing that they had done was rather a
stupendous thing. T.O. recovered first--courage was as the breath of her
little lean nostrils.

"Girls, this is great!" she laughed. "_We've gone and done it!_
There's nothing left but to pack our trunks!"

"Except a few last trifles, such as deciding where to go and what to pay
for it with," put in Laura Ann with soft irony. "We could decide those
things on the train, I suppose--"

"Let's decide 'em on the spot," rejoined T.O. imperturbably. "Somebody
propose something."

Here Billy was visited with one of her inspirations and promptly shared
it with her usual generosity. "We must hunt up a place to--er--'bunk'
in--just bunk and board ourselves. Of course we can't afford to
_be_ boarded--"

"Of course," in chorus.

"Well, then, one of us must go out into the waste places--oh, anywhere
where the grass has room to grow and there are trees and birds and
_barns_--I stipulate barns." Billy made a splendid, comprehensive
gesture that took in all the points of the compass impartially. "One
of us must take a few days off and go and hunt up a nice, inexpensive
little Eldorado for us. There!--there, my friends, you have the
solution of your knotty little problem in a nutshell. I gladly give
my 'services' free."

"Who's going?" demanded practical Laura Ann. "Does anybody kindly
volunteer?"

No volunteers. Silence, broken only by the chirp of the cheery little
teakettle. The immense responsibility of setting the Grand Plan in
motion was not to be lightly assumed. The utter vagueness of Billy's
"waste places" was dismaying, to say the least. There might be many
nice, inexpensive little Eldorados waiting to be "bunked" in and
picnicked in, but where? The world was full of places where there were
trees and birds and barns, but to pick out the particular one where
four tired-out young toilers could lay down their tools and rest
_inexpensively_, looked like a big undertaking.

Billy had settled back in her chair with an air of having done her part
and washed her hands of further responsibility. The rest must do their
parts now. Billy, who was the youngest and frailest of the little colony
of workers, had fallen into the way of dropping asleep whenever
opportunity offered; she did so now with a little sigh of contentment.
Her girlish face against the faded crimson back of the chair looked
startlingly white. In her sleep she moved her lips and the others caught
a pathetic little "_one_-two-three-four" dropping from them. Poor
Billy! She was giving a music lesson in her dreams!

Loraine made a little paper shade and shielded her pale face from the
light, and Laura Ann tilted the clumsy patent rocker backward and
trigged it with a book. Both their faces, tired, too, and pale, were
sweet with kindness. T.O., who did queer and unexpected things, went
round the table on her toes and kissed Billy's forehead openly. Her face
had a puckering frown on it, oddly at variance with the kiss and with
the look in her eyes. The kiss and the look were the things that
mattered--the frown was a thing of insignificance.

"You poor little blessed!" she murmured.

"'Flat your b,'" murmured Billy wearily, and no one laughed. They were
all laughers, but the picture of Billy toiling on monotonously in her
sleep failed to appeal to them as humorous. T.O. went back silently to
her seat.

What the initials T.O. stood for in the way of a name had been the
subject of much guessing in the B-Hive, for the owner of the initials
refused whimsically to explain them. Perhaps she would sometime when the
moon was full or the wind was in the right quarter, she said. Meanwhile
T.O. did well enough--as well as "Billy," anyway, or "Laura Ann"! And
they fell in gayly with her whimsy and called her T.O. The nearest they
had ever come to an answer to their guesses was one night when they had
been discussing "talents" and comparing "callings," and T.O. had sat by,
a wistful little listener and admirer. For T.O. had no talent, and who
would call selling handkerchiefs from morning till night a "calling"?
Even sheer, fine handkerchiefs, warranted every thread linen!

"Talentless One," she broke out startlingly. "You want to know what
'T.O.' stands for--that's it!" And the amused look in the girls' eyes
changed quickly to understanding at sight of her face. "Well," she
challenged, "why don't you say what an appropriate name it is? It's a
wonder you _talented_ ones didn't guess it long ago! Listen!
Loraine's talent is writing--we all know she'll be an author some day.
Laura Ann's is art. Oh, you needn't laugh--need she, girls? One of these
days we're all going to a 'hanging,' and _it'll be Laura Ann's!_
Billy's talent everybody knows. She can play wicked folks good, if
there's a piano handy. Well, what is my talent? Don't everybody speak at
once!" The girl's flushed face defied them. It was bitter with longing
to be a Talented One.

[Illustration: "YOU POOR LITTLE BLESSED!" SHE MURMURED.]

"Dear!" It was like gentle Loraine to begin with a "dear," and like her,
too, to cross the room to T.O. and touch her little bitter face with
cool fingers. "Dear, don't you worry--your talent is _there._"

"Where?" demanded T.O. Then she laughed. "I suppose you mean buried in
a handkerchief! But I shall never be able to dig it out--never! There's
such an awful pile of them on top! They keep piling on new ones every
day. If I keep on selling handkerchiefs till I'm seventy-five, I'll
never get down to my talent."

It was, after all, quite true, though none of them would acknowledge
it--except the Talentless One herself. She was, as she insisted, the odd
one in the busy little B-Hive. Her very face, small and dark and lean,
was an "odd" one; the faces of the other three were marked by an
indefinable something that she called talent, and she was not far wrong.
A subtle refinement, intellectuality, asserted itself gently in all
three of them. The dark little face of T.O. was vivacious and keen, but
not refined or intellectual.

Billy was the baby "B," as Loraine was the acknowledged queen. They all
favored Billy and took care of her. Was it a rainy morning? Somebody got
Billy's rubbers, somebody else her umbrella! Was the child paler than
usual? She must have the softest chair and be babied. Poor little
toiler-Billy, created to have a mother and a home, to sit always in soft
chairs and be taken care of! Yet without them all she was making a
splendid struggle for independence, with the best of them, and they were
conscious of a certain element of heroism in her toiling that none of
the rest of them laid claim to in their own. The other B.'s were proud
of Billy.

T.O. was as small and thin as Billy, but no one thought of taking care
of T.O. or babying her. Instead, T.O.--the Talentless One--took care of
them all. She had always been a toiler, always been alone, and to the
rest it was comparatively a new experience. T.O., as she herself said,
was able to give them all "points."

While tired Billy slept to-night, the Grand Plan discussion was taken up
again and entertained with new enthusiasm. It was now a definite Plan,
since they had voted unanimously to adopt it--it was no longer merely
a unanimous wish, to be bandied about longingly. It remained only to
choose a brave soul to go forth and find for it a "local habitation."

"When Billy wakes up, we'll draw lots," Loraine decided gently. "The one
who gets the longest slip _will go_--but mercy! I hope I sha'n't be
the one! Girls, there really ought to be one to--er--oversee the drawing
of the lots--"

"Hear! Hear!" from T.O.

"You will take your chances with the common herd, my dear," Laura Ann
said firmly. "You really need not be alarmed, though, for I shall draw
the fatal slip. I always do. Then I shall go up-country and engage four
boards at a nice white house with green blinds, and forget to ask how
much they will cost--the 'boards,' I mean--and whether they'll take
Billy at half-price. You'll all like my white house, but you won't be
able to stay more than one night on account of the expense. So you'll
turn me out of the B-Hive and I shall--"

"Oh, don't do anything else--don't!" T.O. groaned. "That will be doing
enough."

"We shall have to find a _very_ cheap place," Loraine said,
thoughtfully, too intent on the fate of the Grand Plan to listen to
pleasantries. "Somewhere where it won't cost much of anything."

"Such an easy place to find!" murmured Laura Ann. "I see myself going
straight to it!"

"We've _got_ to go to it, on account of--" Loraine nodded toward
the sleeping little figure in the softest chair. "Girls, Billy is all
worn out."

"So are you," Laura Ann said tenderly.

"And you," retorted Loraine.

The Talentless One, unintentionally left out, sighed an infinitesimal
sigh, preparatory to smiling stoutly.

"Of course we're going to find the right place," she said convincingly.
"You wait and see. _I_ see it now"--this dreamily; it was odd for
the Talentless One to be dreaming. "It looks this way: Green, grassy and
pine-woodsy and roomy. And cornfields--think of it!"

"'Woods and cornfields--the picture must not be over-done,'" quoted
softly and a little accusingly Laura Ann. But the Talentless One had
never heard of Miss Cary's beautiful poem, and went on calmly:

"And a--pump. Girls, if _I_ find the 'Eldorado,' there'll be a
pump--painted blue!"

Here Billy woke up. There was no time to discountenance the pump.

"Why, I believe I've been asleep!" Billy laughed restedly. "And I've
been somewhere else, too. Guess!"

"To Eldorado," someone ventured.

"Well, I have. It was the loveliest place! There weren't any pianos or
schools or photograph salons or _handkerchiefs_ in it!"

"Then we'll go there!" the Talentless One cried.

Loraine was busy cutting strips of paper. She cut four of varying
lengths and dropped them into an empty cracker-box.

"Somebody shake them up, everyone shut her eyes and draw one," she
ordered. "And the person that draws the longest slip must be the one
to find our Eldorado."

They shut their eyes and fumbled in the cracker-box. The room was oddly
quiet. Laura Ann, who always drew the fatal slip, breathed a little
hard.

But the lot fell to the Talentless One.




CHAPTER II.


"Why, I didn't get it!" exclaimed Laura Ann, in surprise. "And maybe I'm
not thankful! Poor T.O.!"

"Yes, poor T.O.!" agreed Loraine and Billy. The honor of drawing the
longest slip was not, it appeared, a coveted one. But T.O. actually
beamed!

"Needn't anyone pity me!" she said, briskly. "I like it! You see," she
added, explanatorily, "I never did anything remarkable before! Of course
I sha'n't blame you girls any if you shake in your shoes while I'm gone,
but I'll promise to do my little best. If you thought you could trust
me--"

"We do! We do!" Loraine said, warmly, speaking for them all. "And we
pity you, too, poor dear! It looks like an awful undertaking to me."

"How long can you take? Are you sure they'll let you get off down at
Torrey's?" asked Billy, languidly.

"Oh," the Talentless One said, calmly, "I shall get a substitute, of
course. They let the girls do that, if the substitute suits 'em. There's
a girl that used to be at the handkerchief counter that will be glad
enough to earn a little money, I know. She'll be tickled! And she can
keep the place open for me when I get back from the country in the
fall--" Suddenly the Talentless One laughed out joyously. "Hear me!
'When I get back from the country!' Doesn't that sound splendid! Makes
me think of cows and chickens and strawberries and--"

"Pumps painted blue!" laughed Laura Ann. "We're in for a blue pump,
girls!"

       *        *        *        *        *

The substitution at the handkerchief counter could not be arranged
for at once, so the proposed voyage of discovery was a little delayed.
Meanwhile the Grand Plan and a newly-born family of lesser plans
occupied the interim of waiting. One thing they all agreed upon.
It was tired little Billy who voiced it.

"We won't be good this summer, will we? I've been good so long that
I want to rest!"

"It would seem comfortable not to have to be, wouldn't it?" Loraine
laughed. As if Loraine could rest from being good! "Not to have to do
anything for anybody--just be good to yourself! Now, I call that the
luxury of selfishness! And really, girls, we deserve one little
luxury--"

"We'll indulge ourselves," T.O. nodded gravely. "I'm sure I've been
polite to people and patient with people long enough to have a
vacation--a summer vacation!"

"Give me a paper and pencil, somebody, quick!" This from Laura Ann.
She fell to scribbling industriously. The purring of her pencil over
the paper had a smooth, wicked sound as if it were writing wicked things.
It was.

"Be it known," read Laura Ann, flourishing her pencil, "that we, the
undersigned, having endeavored, up to the present, to be good, consider
ourselves entitled to be selfish during our summer vacation. That we
mean to be selfish--that we herewith swear to be! That we do not mean to
'do good unto' anybody except ourselves! Inasmuch as we have faithfully
tried to do our several duties hitherto, we feel justified in resting
from the same until such time as we may--er--wish to begin again.

"Furthermore, resolved: That any or all persons hereunto subscribed, who
fail to keep the letter of this compact, be summarily _dropped!_"

(Signed) "LAURA ANN BYERS."

The paper went the rounds and was soberly signed by each girl in turn.
Loraine, the last, traced three words in her tiny handwriting at the
head of the paper.

"The Wicked Compact!" read Billy over her shoulder, and nodded
agreeingly. "That's a good name for it. Doesn't it make you feel lovely
and shuddery to belong to a Wicked Compact! Oh, you needn't think I
shall go back on the rules and regulations! If somebody gets down on his
knees and implores, 'Which note shall I flat?' I shall turn coldly away,
or else say, 'Suit yourself, my dear!' But, girls, oh girls, I hope
there won't be any pianos in Eldorado!"

"Probably there will be only cabinet organs--don't worry, dear!" soothed
Laura Ann.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day after the Wicked Compact was drawn up and signed, T.O. started
on her quest for Eldorado. She would have no one escort her to the
station; she would give no intimation of her plans. They were all to
wait as patiently as possible till she came back. It was only because
she had to, poor child, that she accepted the contributions of the
others toward her expenses of travel.

At the station she straightened her short stature to its utmost and
approached the ticket window. She might have been, from her splendid
dignity of manner, six feet instead of five.

"Will you please tell me which road is the cheapest to travel on?" she
asked, clearly, undismayed outwardly, inwardly quailing before the
ticket man's amazement. His curious eyes surveyed her through the little
opening.

"Why--er--well, there's the most competition on the X & Y Road," he
said, slowly. "The rates on that line are about down to the limit--"

"Thank you," the dignified one said, and turned away. She found the time
table of the X & Y Road on the station wall, and studied it
thoughtfully. She had resolved to select the place with the most
promising name. Back at the ticket window she patiently waited her turn
in a little stream of people. The woman ahead of her was flourishing a
dainty, embroidered handkerchief, and she wondered idly if it had come
from her counter at Torrey's. If so, why was it not a little white flag
of truce that gave her a right to say "How do you do?" to the woman?
The Talentless One suddenly felt a little lonely.

"Ticket to Placid Pond, please," she said, when her turn came. The very
sound of the peaceful little name gave her courage. Placid Pond! Placid
Pond! Could any place be more indicative of rest? Then she bethought her
of the Wicked Compact, and felt almost impelled to hand back the
ticket--Placid Pond could not be the right place to be bad in!

But it was too late!

"Two-twenty," the ticket man said, monotonously, and she fumbled in her
lean, little purse. To Placid Pond she would go, and, if there were
barns and cornfields and a blue-painted pump--the thrill of expectancy
ran through her veins, and she forgot the Wicked Compact.

The Talentless One had never glided through green places like this
before, between slow, clear little streams, by country children waving
their hats. She had never seen far, splendid reaches of hills,
undulating softly against the sky. Wonder and delight filled her. She
found herself envying the little, brown children who waved their hats.

"It's pretty, ain't it?" a fresh, old voice said in her ear. When she
turned, it was to look into a fresh, old face behind her.

"Ain't it a pretty world the Lord's made? The 'firmament showeth his
handiwork,' don't it? Where are you going to, deary?"

"A place called Placid Pond," answered the girl, smiling back.

"_No?_ Well, I declare! That's where Emmeline Camp lives that was a
Jones an' spelt out o' my spellin'-book! If you see Emmeline, you tell
her you saw me on the cars. Emmeline and I have always kep' up our
interest in each other. She'll be tickled--you tell her I've learnt that
leaf-stitch at last! She'll understand!"

The thin, old voice tinkled on pleasantly in the Talentless One's ears.

"Come back here an' set with me, deary, an' I'll tell you which house is
Emmeline's, so, if you go past, you'll know it--it's painted green! Did
you ever! But Emmeline was always set on green. She was married in a
green silk, an' we girls said she married a green husband!"

T.O. laughed enjoyingly. She began to feel acquainted with Emmeline, and
to hope she should find the green house--perhaps it would be the
Eldorado house! Wonders happened sometimes.

"I don't suppose--there isn't a blue pump, is there? I've set my heart
on a blue pump!" she laughed, as if the little, old woman who knew
Emmeline would understand. The little, old woman smiled delightedly--as
if she understood!

"Dear land, no! I hope Emmeline ain't painted her pump blue--and her
livin' in a green house! But she'd go out an' do it--it would be just
like Emmeline, if she knew anybody wanted a blue pump! Here we are,
deary! This is Placid Pond we're coming to! You see that sheet o' water,
don't you? Well, that's it!"

The Talentless One buttoned her jacket and clutched her little black
bag. Her thin cheeks bloomed suddenly with tiny red spots of excitement.
She seemed on the edge of an Adventure; and, to one who had stood behind
a counter nearly all her days, an Adventure began with a capital A.
The train slowed up and stood panting--in a hurry to go again.

"Oh, I wish you were going to get out here!" T.O. said, wistfully.

The little, old woman seemed like an old friend to her. She felt oddly
young and inexperienced. Then, remembering the girls left behind in the
B-Hive and their confidence in her, she threw up her small head and
hurried away valiantly.

"Good-by!" she called back, from the bit of platform outside.

"Good-by! Give my love to Emmeline!" nodded and beamed the little, old
face in the car window.

It was a tiny place. T.O. could see only the great, placid sheet of
water and the diminutive station at first. She accosted the only human
being in sight.

"Which way is the city--village, I mean?" she asked.

He was an old man and held a scooped palm behind his ear.

"Eh?"

"The village--please direct me to it."

"Well," he laughed good-humoredly, "all the village they is you'll
strike yonder," pointing. "You keep a-goin', an' you'll git thar!"

She thanked him and set out courageously. She kept "a-goin'." The
country road was shady and dusty and sweet with mystic, unseen, growing
things. Her feet, used to hard pavements, sank into the soft dust
luxuriously. She breathed deep and swung along at a splendid pace. It
was hard to believe that she was a clerk at Torrey's! There did not seem
to have ever been handkerchiefs in the world--even all-linen, warranted
ones!

"This is Eldorado!" she said aloud, and was proud of herself for finding
it so soon--coming straight to it! Lucky she had been the one to draw
the longest strip.

She passed one or two houses, but none of them were painted green. She
said to herself she would keep on to "Emmeline's" house. The whim had
seized her and was holding on tight that Emmeline's might be the Right
Place. So she swung on buoyantly.

[Illustration: "WHICH WAY IS THE VILLAGE?" SHE ASKED.]

A stone wall bordered the road on one side, and over the wall she spied
a sprinkling of little flowers that called, "Come and pick us!" to her.
She did not know that they were bluets, but she knew they were dainty
and sweet and beckoned to her. She paused an instant uncertainly, and
then climbed the wall. It was rather an arduous undertaking for a clerk
at a handkerchief counter, and she went about it clumsily. The wall was
high and the stones "jiggled" in a terrifying way. One big stone climbed
down on the other side with her--they went together unceremoniously.

The Talentless One laughed a little under her breath as she sat up among
the little flowers, but she was not quite sure that she wanted to laugh.
The big stone was on her foot and she regarded it with disfavor. It
required considerable strength to roll it off--then she got up. Then she
sank down again very suddenly.

"Oh!" she cried, sharply. For several moments she said nothing more, did
nothing more. The discovery she had made was not a pleasant discovery.
In Eldorado clumsy people who could not climb stone walls came to grief.
She had come to grief. When she moved her foot, terrible twinges of pain
were telegraphed all over her body. She sat, a sorry little heap, among
the stranger flowers that had brought about her ruin. The roadway
stretched dustily and emptily up and down, on the other side of the
wall.

"Oh!" breathed the Talentless One. It had been a sigh before, now it was
a groan. What was she to do? A sort of terror seized her. She had never
been really frightened before. The beautiful country about her no longer
was beautiful. It was no longer Eldorado to her.

Then she discovered a green fleck down the road, a different green from
the grass and trees. If it should be Emmeline's house--if she could get
to it!

"I must!" she said, and hobbled to her feet. Somehow she got over the
wall, and went stumbling toward the green spot. The agony in her foot
increased every moment; she grew dizzy with it.

It must be Emmeline's house--a little, green-painted one beside the
road! There could not be two green houses in Placid Pond. With a long
breath of relief she got to the door. After that she did not know
anything for a little time, then her eyes opened. Someone with a kind,
anxious face was bending over her. It was Emmeline! It looked like the
face of an old friend to the poor, little Talentless One.

"There, there, poor dear! Never mind where you be, or who I be--you
'tend right to gettin' out o' your faint! Sniff this bottle--there!
You'll be all right in a minute. It's your foot, ain't it? It's all
swollen up--how'd you sprain it?"

She had the injured foot in her tremulous old hands, gently loosening
the shoe. The girl, though she winced with pain, did not utter a sound.

"There ain't any doctor this side of Anywhere," the kind voice ran on,
"but never you mind. I'll risk but what I've got liniments that will
doctor you up."

And the girl, looking up into the peaceful old "lineaments," smiled
faintly, and knew there was healing in them. Even in her throbbing pain
she could think of this new pun that she would regale the girls with
when she got back to them--if she ever got back!

"You are 'Emmeline,' aren't you!" she presently questioned, feebly, like
an old woman, for the pain seemed to have made her old. "I'm so glad you
are Emmeline!"

Poor dear, she was wandering in her mind, and no wonder, with a foot
swollen up like that! It was queer, though, hitting on the right name
in that way.

"There! there! Yes, I am Emmeline, though I might've been Sophia or
Debby Jane! Namin' people is sort o' accidental. I always wished they'd
named me somethin' prettier by accident! But I guess Emmeline will have
to do."

It was long after this before any explanation was made. The fact that
it was Emmeline was enough for those first hours.

"Now, you kind of bear on to yourself, poor dear! This boot has got to
come off!" the kind voice crooned. But, in the awful process of "bearing
on," the Talentless One shot out into the dark, as if pushed by a heavy
hand. How long it was before she came back into the light she did not
know--it seemed to be a point of light that pricked her eyes. She shut
them against it, and longed to drift away again; the dark had been cool
and pleasant.

It was a lighted lamp on a tiny, round table. She found it out the next
time she opened her eyes. She was in a little bedroom, on the bed. The
door was open, and a voice drifted in to her:

"She was coming to beautifully when I left her. I thought mebbe she'd
feel more at home to come to alone. I've got her ankle all dressed nice,
but it would make your heart ache to see it! The poor dear won't walk
again this one while--"

"But, Emmeline Camp, what are you going to do with her all that time?"
The second voice was a little shrill.

"Sh! I'm goin' to doctor her up, just as if she was the little girl the
Lord never gave me. I've always known what I'd do if my little girl
broke anything--There! you'll have to excuse me, Mrs. Williams, while
I take this cup o'tea in."

It is odd how many little confidences can be exchanged in the time of
cooling and drinking a cup of tea. The caller had gone away, and the old
woman and the girl were left alone. Little by little the story of the
B-Hive and the quest for an Eldorado came out. Emmeline Camp sat and
nodded, and clandestinely wiped her eyes.

"I see--I see, deary! Now, don't you talk any more and get faint again.
I'll talk. You no need to worry about anything in the world--not yet!
When it's time to commence, I'll tell you. How does your foot feel now?
Dear, dear! When I was fussing over it, it seemed just as if it was my
little Amelia's foot! I've always known what I'd do if she sprained
hers, and so I did it to yours, deary!"

"Is Amelia your daughter?"

The old face wavered between a smile and tears. "Yes," she nodded, "but
she warn't ever born. It's a kind of a secret between me and the Lord.
He knows I've made believe Amelia. I've always been kind of lonesome,
an' she's been a sight of company to me. She's been a good daughter,
Amelia has!" Now it was a smile. "We've set an' sewed patchwork
together, ever since she grew up. When she was little--there, deary,
hear me run on! But you remind me so much of Amelia. You can laugh just
as much as you want to at me runnin' on like this about a little girl
that warn't ever born--mebbe laughin' will help your foot."

She took up the empty cup and went away, but she came back and stood a
minute in the doorway.

"There's this about it," she laughed, in a tender, little way, "if she
warn't ever born, she won't ever die. I sha'n't lose Amelia!"

       *       *       *       *       *

To the three girls waiting at the B-Hive came a letter. They read it,
three heads in a bunch:

"Eldorado, June 26.

"Come whenever you want to. Directions enclosed."




CHAPTER III.


There was a postscript. It was like T.O. to put the most of the letter
into the postscript.

"P.S.--Never call me the Talentless One again" (as if they ever had!),
"when I came straight to the Eldorado--tumbled right into it. I've
decided to stay here until you come--please tell my substitute so. I
know she'll be so glad she'll throw up her hat. Bring your sheets and
pillow-cases. Come by way of the X. & Y. R.R. to a place called Placid
Pond."

The three readers, bunched together over the letter, uttered a cry of
delight. "Placid Pond!"--of all the dear, delightful, placid names! The
very look of it on paper was restful; it _sounded_ restful when you
said it over and over--"Placid Pond. Placid Pond. Placid Pond."

"Oh, she's a dear--she's an _artist!_" cried Laura Ann, who
measured all things by their relationship to art. This was an own
cousin!

"Read on--somebody hold the letter still!" Billy cried excitedly. And
they read on: "Take the only road there is to take, and keep on to a
house that's painted green. It will be Emmeline's house, though they
might have named her Sophia, she says, by accident. But you will be glad
she is Emmeline. She has a beautiful daughter that never was born and
never will die--oh, girls, come as quick as ever you can!"

Yours, "The Talented One."

"P.S. No. 2.--Don't climb any stone walls. The stones are not stuck on."

For a tiny space the three girls looked at each other in silence. The
letter in Loraine's hand was a masterpiece, full of enticing mysteries
that beckoned to them to come and find the "answers." What kind of an
Eldorado was this that was called Placid Pond, and was full of
mysteries? How could they wait! They must pack up and go at once!

"'Talented One,' indeed!--she's a genius! See how she's left us to guess
things, instead of explaining them all out in a nice, tame way--oh,
_girls_"--Laura Ann's eyes shone--"won't we have the greatest
time!"

"What I want to know is, who is Emmeline--"

"Yes, who is Emmeline?"

"And who _can_ her daughter _be_? She sounds so lovely and ghostly!"

"Everything sounds lovely and ghostly. When can we go, girls?" This from
practical Loraine. "_I_ can't till after the Fourth."

"Nor I," groaned Billy, dolefully.

"I could, but I shall not--I shall wait for you two," Laura Ann said
quietly.

Loraine turned upon her. "You needn't," she said, "now that you've
signed the compact--you can do whatever you _want_ to now, you
know. Needn't think of anybody but yourself."

"The privilege of being selfish doesn't begin till we get to Eldorado,"
laughed Laura Ann. "You'll see what I do then!"

It was arranged that they should start on the fifth of July. "With our
sheets and pillow-cases," appended Billy. No one thought of writing to
T.O. for further particulars. No one wanted further particulars. The
uncertainly and mystery that enveloped Eldorado was its greatest charm.
They speculated, to be sure, at odd moments, as to the identity of the
person who might have been Sophia but was Emmeline, and they wrestled a
little with the hidden meaning of Postscript Number Two. Why were they
especially bidden not to climb stone walls? And _why_ was the
Talented One "staying over" till they came?

"Why? Why? Why?" chanted Billy, "but don't anybody dare to guess why!
Who wants to know!"

"Not me!" echoed ungrammatically Laura Ann.

While they waited and speculated mildly, and packed and repacked their
things, T.O. lay on the bed in Emmeline Camp's little bedroom and winced
with pain whenever she moved her wounded foot. But she was very happy.
"Peace is in my soul, if not my _sole!_" she thought, a slave still
to the punning habit. She had never been so peaceful in her life. The
little old woman who had befriended her bustled happily in and out of
the little bedroom. She bathed and rubbed the swollen ankle, and smiled
and chattered to the girl at the other end of it. Her "lineaments" were
working a cure, surely.

It had all been decided upon. The B-Hive was to be transplanted for the
summer to the little, green-painted house trailed over with
morning-glory vines and roses. Emmeline Camp had wanted, she said, for
forty years, to go upon a long journey, to visit her brother. Here was
her chance. The small sum she had at last consented to be paid for the
use of her little house would pay her traveling expenses one way, at
least, and John would be glad enough, she said, to pay her fare home,
to get rid of her! Only she was quite able to pay it herself.

"I've kind of hankered to go to see John all these years. Forty years is
quite a spell to hanker, isn't it? But I never felt like leaving the
house behind, and I couldn't take it along very conveniently, so I
stayed to home. And then--my dear, you can laugh as well as not, but
I didn't like to leave Amelia."

"But you might have taken her with--"

"No," seriously, "I couldn't 've taken Amelia. I think, deary, it might
've killed her; she's part of the little house and the morning-glories
and roses. I'd have had to leave Amelia if I'd gone, and it didn't seem
right."

"But now--"

"Now," the little, old woman laughed in her odd, tender way that "went
with" Amelia, "now she'll have plenty of young company--all o' you here
with her. I shall make believe she's coming and going with you, and
it'll be a sight of comfort. Yes, deary, I guess this is going to be my
chance to visit John."

"And our chance to have a summer in the country," completed the Talented
One. "Oh, I think you are--_dear_! Whatever will the other girls
say when I tell them about you!"

One day T.O. remembered the blue pump. She gazed out of the window at
the brown one in the little yard. "Who would have thought," she sighed,
"that I could be so happy without a blue pump!"

"What's that, deary?" The little, old woman was sewing patchwork near by.

"Oh," laughed the girl, "I always _did_ want a pump that was
painted blue. I saw a picture of one once when I was a little mite, and
it impressed me--such a lovely, bright blue! I thought it went
beautifully with the green grass! But I can get along without it, I
guess."

"We have to get along without having things painted to suit us," nodded
the little, old woman philosophically. But she remembered the blue pump.
There was a can of paint out in the shed room, and there was Jane
Cotton's Sam.

Jane Cotton's Sam was a "feature" of Placid Pond--a whole set of
features, T.O. said. He was a lumbering, awkward fellow, well up to the
end of his teens, the only hope of widowed Jane. The Lord had given him
a splendid head, but the Placid Pond people were secretly triumphing in
the knowledge that Sam had failed to pass in his college examinations,
"head or no head." Jane had always boasted so of Sam's brains, and
predicted such a wonderful future for him! All her soul was set on Sam's
success--well, wasn't it time her pride had a fall? Mebbe now she'd see
Sam wasn't much different from other people's boys.

Jane's heart was reported to be broken by the boy's failure, and Sam
went about sulkily defiant. He made a great pretense of lofty
indifference, but maybe he didn't care!--maybe not! Emmeline Camp knew
in her gentle old heart that he cared. She worried about Sam.

All this the Talented One learned, little by little, in the way country
gossip is learned. She learned many other things, too, about the
neighbors--things that she lay and pondered about. It seemed queer to
find out that even a placid little place like this, set among the
peaceful hills, had its tragedies and comedies--its pitiful little
skeletons behind the doors.

"That's Old '61," Mrs. Camp said, pointing to an old figure in the road.
"See him go marching past!--he always marches, as if he heard drums
beating and he was keeping time. I tell 'em he _does_ hear 'em.
He lives all alone up on the edge o' the woods, and folks say he spends
most all his time trying to pick march tunes out on the organ. A few
years ago he got some back pension money, and up and spent it for a
cabinet organ! Dear land! it seemed a pity, when he might have got him
some nice clothes or something sensible. But there he sets and sets over
that organ, trying to pick out tunes! Well,"--the gentle old voice took
on charity--"well, if that's his way of being happy, I s'pose he's got
as good a right to it as I have to--Amelia," a whimsical little smile
lighting up the old face, but underlying it the tenderness that the girl
on the bed had come to look for whenever any reference was made to
Amelia.

"We've all got our idiosyncreases," added Emmeline Camp, "only some of
'em's creased in a little deeper'n others. I guess mine and Old '61's
are pretty considerable deep!"

The early July days were cloudless and full of hot, stinging noises.
T.O. crawled out to lie in the grass under a great tree, and exult in
room and freedom and rest. Her ankle was still very painful, but she
regarded it with philosophical toleration: "You needn't have climbed a
stone wall, need you? Well, then, what have you to complain of? The best
thing you can do is to keep still." Which was, without doubt, the truth.
"Anyhow, it isn't becoming in you to be so puffed up!"

It was decided that Mrs. Camp should start on her trip before the other
girls arrived. Hence, on the morning of the day they had set to come,
the little old woman and her bags and bundles rode away down the dusty
country road. Her lean, brown, crumpled old face had an exalted
expression; the joy of anticipation and the triumph of patient waiting
met in it and blended oddly. It was a great day for Emmeline Camp.

"Good-by, deary. Keep right on rubbing, and don't go to walking 'round.
There's some cookies left in the cooky-crock, and a pie or two on the
shelf to kind of set you going. Take good care o' yourselves."

"And Amelia," whispered the girl, drawing the old face down to her.
"We'll take good care of Amelia."

It was a little lonely after the old stage rumbled away. The Talented
One turned whimsically to Amelia for company. She tried to imagine her,
as the little old woman did, but in vain. She could not conjure up the
sweet, elusive face, the hair, the eyes, the grave little mouth of
Amelia. The little old woman had taken away with her love, the key. She
must have taken Amelia away with her, too, the girl thought, smiling at
her own fancy. So, for company, she must wait until Loraine and Billy
and Laura Ann came, on the further edge of the day. She lay in the cool
grass, and made beatific plans for all the long, lazy days to come. No
hurrying, or worrying--each one for herself, happy in her own way. Only
themselves to think of for the space of a golden summer!

"I am glad she took Amelia," the girl in the grass laughed softly.
"We'd never be able to keep to the Compact with Amelia 'round--Amelia
would never have signed a 'Wicked Compact'!" Which, in the event of
gentle, unsinning Amelia ever having been born, might or might not have
been true. It would have been harder work, reflected the girl in the
grass, for Amelia to have been unsinning and gentle, if she had been born.

Jane Cotton's Sam came lounging down the road, cap over one eye, face
surlily defiant. T.O. watched him with displeasure. So that was the kind
of a boy that gave up? Poor kind of a boy! Why didn't he try it again,
especially when his poor mother's heart was breaking? Didn't he know
that giving up was worse than failing in his examinations? Somebody
ought to tell him--why, he was stopping at Mrs. Camp's little front
gate! He was coming in!

The girl lying in the long grass under the tree sat up hurriedly. Quick,
quick! what was his name? Oh, yes, Sam!

"Good-morning, Sam," she said pleasantly. But the boy, with a mere nod
of his splendidly-modeled head, hurried away toward the tiny barn. The
girl had seen the dark flush that mounted upward from his neck over his
pink and white cheeks.

"Poor thing! He knows _I_ know that he didn't pass--that is the
only 'out' about living in the country: everybody knows everything.
Well, if it makes him blush, then his mother needn't break her heart
_yet_. I like the looks of that boy, if he does go 'round
scowling." Whereupon the Talented One promptly dismissed Jane Cotton's
Sam from her meditations. It did not occur to her to question his right
to be on Mrs. Camp's premises. She lay back in the grass and took up
again the interrupted thread of her musings. By gentle degrees odd
fancies took possession of her.

[Illustration: THE BOY, WITH A MERE NOD, HURRIED AWAY.]

The sprinkling of great, white daisies in the grass beside her--suppose,
now, this minute, they changed into white handkerchiefs, spread out on
a green counter! Then she would have to sell them to passers-by; it was
her business to sell handkerchiefs. Someone was coming marching up the
road--suppose she tried to sell him one, for the fun of it!--to make a
good story for the girls. Laughing, she got up and leaned on the fence.
She "dared" herself to do it. Then, courteously, "Can I sell you
anything in handkerchiefs to-day? Initialed, embroidered--"

The marching feet stopped. Shrewd old eyes studied her face and
twinkled, responsive to the harmless mischief visible in it.

"You got any with flags on--in the corners or anywhere? Or drums on?"
It was Old '61. "Or red, white an' blue ones? I'd like one o'
_them_--I fit in the war," explanatorily.

"Yes?" The saleswoman was not especially interested in the war; it is
not the way with many of her kind to be interested in things.

"I fit clear through--in the Wilderness, and Bull Run, an' plenty more.
They couldn't get rid o' me, the enemy couldn't! No, sir, where there
was marchin' an' shootin', I was bound to be there! They hit me time 'n'
again, but I didn't waste no unnecessary time in hospittles--I had to
git back to the boys."

She was interested now; she forgot she was to sell him a handkerchief.
"Go on," she said.

"It was great! You ought to heard the drums an' smelt the smoke, an'
felt your feet marchin' under you, an' your knapsack poundin' your
back--yes, sir, an' bein' hungry an' thirsty an' wore out! You'd ought
to seen how ragged the boys got, an' heard 'em whistlin' 'Through
Georgy' while they sewed on patches--oh, you'd ought to _whistled_
'Through Georgy'!"

The girl, watching the kindled old face, saw a shadow creep over it.

"I useter--I useter--but someway I've lost it. It's pretty hard to've
_marched_ through Georgy an' forgot the tune about. Some days I
'most get holt of it again--I thought I could, on the organ, but I
can't, not the hull of it. Someway I've lost it--it's pretty hard. It
ha'nts me--if you ever be'n ha'nted, you know how bad it is."

No, the girl who was leaning on the fence had never been ha'nted, but
her eyes were wide with pity for the old soul who had marched through
Georgia and forgotten the tune.

"Some days I 'most ketch it. I don't suppose"--the old voice halted
diffidently--"I don't suppose _you'd_ whistle it, would you? Jest
through once--"

But she could not whistle even once "Through Georgia." "I'm so sorry!"
she cried. "I can't whistle, or sing, or anything. I wish I could!"
She wished she were Billy; Billy could have done it.

Old '61 marched on, up the dusty road, and the girl went back to her
tree. She had not sold any daisy-handkerchiefs, but she had her story to
tell the girls. She lay in the grass thinking of it. Once or twice she
pursed her lips and made a ludicrous ineffectual attempt to whistle, but
she did not smile. Jane Cotton's Sam clicked the gate, going out, but
she did not notice. When she did at last look up, and her gaze wandered
over the little yard aimlessly, she suddenly uttered a little note of
surprise.

"Why!" she cried.




CHAPTER IV.


For the pump was a blue pump! A miracle had been wrought while she mused
in the grass and listened to Old '61. The little old brown pump had
blossomed out gayly, brilliantly.

"Why!" Then a subdued chuckle reached her from some nearby ambush out
beyond the fence. She put two and two together--the pump, the laugh, and
Jane Cotton's Sam. Six! Jane Cotton's Sam, while she was day-dreaming
and Marching through Georgia with Old '61, had painted the brown pump
blue! That was his business on Mrs. Camp's premises. Mrs Camp had
remembered--the dear, oh, the dear!--that she wanted a blue pump, and
had got the boy to come and make one. And now, down behind the fence
somewhere, the boy was laughing at her amazement. Well, let him
laugh--she laughed, too! Suddenly she began to clap her hands by way of
applause to her hidden audience.

The pump itself was distinctly a disappointment. In gay-hued pictures,
seen by childish eyes, blue pumps accord with green grass and trees--in
nature, seen by maturer eyes, there is something wrong with the colors.
They look out of place--either the green growing things or the gay blue
pump do not belong there. The girl's loyalty to little, kind Emmeline
Camp would not let her admit that it was the blue pump that didn't
"belong." She was glad--glad--that it was blue, for it stood for a
thoughtful kindness to her, and thoughtful kindnesses had been rare in
her self-dependent, hustling life.

"Hurrah for the blue pump!" she cried softly. She felt like going up to
it and hugging it, but fortunately she did not yield to the impulse.

The other girls arrived at dusk. T.O., her knee in a chair, had hitched
laboriously from little kitchen to little dining-room and got supper.
Spent and triumphant, she waited in the doorway. She could hear their
voices coming up the road--Billy's excited voice, Laura Ann's gay one,
Loraine's calm and sweet. She longed to run out to meet them. Next best,
she sent her own voice, in a clear, long call.

"That's T.O.! Girls, let's run!" she heard Billy say.

"Why doesn't _she_ run?" Laura Ann demanded severely. "That would
be perfectly appropriate under the circumstances."

"'Tis queer, isn't it, that she didn't come to meet us?" Loraine added.
In another moment they had reached Emmeline Camp's little green-painted
house and found the Talented One waiting impatiently at the gate. Things
explained themselves rapidly. Exclamations of pity crowded upon
exclamations of delight and welcome. Four happy young wage-earners sat
down to T.O.'s hardly-prepared little supper and four tongues were
loosed. Even Loraine did her part of the chattering.

"I feel so nice and _placid_ already!" enthused Billy.

"Oh, so do I!--so do I!" echoed Laura Ann. "It's such a comfort to get
one's chains off!--I felt mine slip off back there at that dear, funny
little station."

"Oh, was _that_ what I heard clanking?" offered quiet Loraine, and
was promptly cheered.

The meal was a merry one. And afterwards there was exploring to be done
about the little yard and orchard and up and down the road, in the dim,
sweet twilight, with the Talented One at the gate calling soft
directions.

"And I've got a blue pump for you," she laughed. "Just wait till
daylight! Don't anybody feel of it in the dark to see if it's blue,
because you'll find it's green! There's a story goes with the pump and
one with its mother--I mean with the boy-who-painted-its mother! Placid
Pond is full of stories."

"Nice, dozy, placid ones, I suppose," Laura Ann returned lightly. But
the Talented One shook her head.

"Wait till you hear them," she said gravely.

"Give us some of the titles to-night," coaxed Billy. They were all back
on the little doorsteps and the moon was rising, majestic and golden,
behind the trees.

"Well--" she considered thoughtfully, "there's 'The Story of Amelia',
and the story of 'The Boy Who Didn't Pass', and the one of 'Old '61'--",

"Oh, tell us--tell us!" Billy pleaded, and would not be refused. It was
never easy to refuse Billy. She had her way this time, and there in the
mellow night-light, with soft night-noises all about them, T.O. told her
stories. She had never told a story before in her life, and her voice at
first stumbled diffidently, but as she went on, a queer thing
happened--she did not seem to be telling it herself, but the little old
woman who loved Amelia seemed to be telling it! Then the Boy Who Didn't
Pass, then Old '61, in his tremulous, halting old voice.

They listened in perfect silence, and even after the stories ended they
said nothing. Billy, quite unashamed, was crying over poor Old '61.

"You'd have thought, wouldn't you," T.O. murmured after a while, "that
places like this would be humdrum-y and commonplace? But I guess there
are 'stories' everywhere. I'm beginning to find out things, girls."

The next day began in earnest the long-yearned-for time of rest. It was
decided unanimously over the breakfast cups, to live and move, eat and
all but sleep, out of doors. To devote four separate and four combined
energies to having a good time. To abide by the rules and regulations
of the Wicked Compact--long live the Wicked Compact! Laura Ann made an
illuminated copy of it, framed it in a border of hurriedly-painted
forget-me-nots and hung it on the screen door, where they could not help
seeing it and "remembering their vows," Laura Ann said. It was a matter
of gay conjecture with them who would be the first to break the Compact.

"And be driven out of the B-Hive--not I!" Billy said decisively. "I
shan't have the least temptation to break it, anyway--I feel selfish all
over! You couldn't drive me to do a good deed with a--a pitchfork!"

"Me either--not even with a darning-needle!" laughed Laura Ann. "If
anybody asks me to lend her a pin, hear me say, 'Can't, my dear; it's
against the rules.' Needn't anybody worry about losing me out o' the
Hive!"

"Loraine will be the one--you see," T.O. said lazily. "And what I want
to know is, how are we going to live without Loraine? I vote we append a
by-law. By-law I.: 'Resolved, that we except Loraine--just Loraine.'"

"Second the motion," murmured Billy, on her back in the grass, nibbling
clover heads.

"No," Loraine said severely, "I refuse to be put into a by-law."

       *       *       *       *       *

The summer days were long days--lazy, somnolent days. The four girls
spent them each in her own separate way. Sometimes the little colony met
only at mealtimes--with glowing reports of the mornings' or afternoons'
wanderings.

Billy, it was noticed, although like the rest she wandered abroad, made
no reports. Had she had a good time? Yes--yes, of course. Where had she
been all the morning or all the afternoon? Oh--oh, to places. Woods?
Yes--that is, almost woods. And more than that they failed to elicit.
Nearly every day she started away by herself, and after awhile they
noticed that she went in the same direction. She went briskly, alertly,
like one with a definite end in view. Now, where did Billy go? Their
vagrant curiosity was aroused, but not yet to the point of
investigation.

Old '61 knew. Every morning since that first morning he had strained his
dim old eyes to catch a glimpse of a little figure coming blithely up
the road. On that first morning it had stopped in front of his little
house and said pleasant things to him as he sat on the doorsteps. He
remembered all the things.

"Good-morning! It's a splendid day, isn't it?"

And: "What a perfectly lovely place you live in! With the woods so near
you can shake hands with them out of your windows!"

And: "Don't the birds wake you up mornings? I wonder what they sing
about up here." Then she had glanced at his ancient army coat and added
the Pleasantest Thing Of All: "I think they must sing Battle Hymns and
Red, White and Blue songs and 'Marching Through Georgia,' don't they?"

"Not the last one," he had answered sadly. "They never sing that. If
they did, I'd 'a' learnt it of 'em long ago."

"Do you like that one best--very best?" she had asked, and he liked to
remember how she had smiled. He had stood up then and thrown back his
old shoulders proudly.

"Why, you see, marm," he had said simply, "I _marched_ through
Georgy!"

The next morning, too, she had stopped and talked to him. But it was not
until the third time that he had ventured to ask her to whistle it. And
then--Old '61, now peering down the road for the blithe little figure,
thrilled again at the remembrance of what had happened. She had laughed
gently and said she did not know how to whistle, but if he would like
her to sing it--

There had been eight mornings all told, now, counting this morning,
which was sure to be. Yes, clear 'way down there somebody was comin'
swingin' along--somebody little an' happy an' spry. Old '61 began to
laugh softly. He could hardly wait for her to come and sit down on the
doorstep and sing it. Two or three times--she would sing it two or three
times.

He had a surprise for her this morning. With great pains he had dragged
his cabinet organ out onto the little porch. It was all open, ready.
He went a little way down the road in his eagerness to meet her.

"Good-morning!" Billy called brightly. "Am I late to-day?"

"Jest a little--jest a little," he quavered joyously, "but I'll forgive
ye! There's somethin' waitin' up there--I've got a surprise for ye!"

"Honest?" Billy stood still in the road, looking into the eager,
childish old face. "Oh, goody! I love surprises. Am I to guess it?"

"No, no, jest to come an' play on it!" he quavered. Then a cloud settled
over his face and dimmed the delight in it. "Mebbe you don't know how
to?" he added, a tremulous upward lift to his voice.

"How to 'play on' a surprise!" cried Billy. "Well, how am I to know
until I see it? I can play on 'most everything else!"

They had got to the little front gate--were going up the little
carefully-weeded path--were very close to it now. Billy sprang up the
steps.

"I can! I can!" she laughed. "Hear me!" Her fingers ran up and down the
keys, then settled into a soft, sweet little melody. Another and
another--

The old man on the lower step sat patiently listening and waiting. If
she did not play it soon, he should have to ask her to, but he would
rather have her play it without. Perhaps the next one--

The next one was beautiful, but not It--not _It_--not the Right
One.

"There!" finished Billy with a flourish. "You see, I _can_ play on
a surprise!" She stopped abruptly at sight of the disappointed old face
below her. For an instant she was bewildered, then a beautiful instinct
that had lain unused on some shelf of Billy's mind came to life and
whispered to her what the trouble was.

"Oh!" she cried softly, "Oh, I'm sorry I forgot!" She turned back to
the little organ and began to play again.

[Illustration: THE OLD MAN SAT LISTENING AND WAITING.]

Up went the sagging old head, up the sagging old shoulders! Old '61 was
back in "Georgy," marching through mud and pine-barrens, in cold and
hunger and weariness--with the boys, from Atlanta to the sea. Hurrah!
hurrah! the flag that made them free!

He was not old, not alone and forlorn and cumbering the earth. He was
young and straight and loyal, defying suffering and death, with glory
and fame, perhaps, on there ahead. His country needed him--he was
marching through Georgia for his country.

Billy played it over and over, untiring. A lump grew in her throat at
the sight of the old face down there on the lower step. For so much was
written on the old face!

Suddenly Old '61 got up and began to march, swinging his old legs out
splendidly. Down the walk, down the road, he went, as far as the music
went, then came marching splendidly back. Head up, shoulders squared,
the "boys" marching invisible beside him and before him and behind him,
he was no longer Old '61, but Young '61.

The next day Billy ate her breakfast quietly, helped clear away the
things, and went quietly away. She did not stop to read Laura Ann's
gay-painted "Compact" on the screen door. It might even have been
noticed, if anyone cared to notice, that she did not look at it, that
she hurried a little through the door, as if to avoid it.

Old '61 was waiting at the gate. She smiled at the eager invitation she
read in his face.

"No," she said, shaking her head for emphasis, "no, I'm not going to
play it this time. I'm going to teach you to play it! I shall be going
back to the city before long, and then what will you do when you want to
hear it? Perhaps you couldn't keep the tune in your head. I'm going to
show you an easy way to play it--just the air. I shall have to try it
myself first, of course. But I'm sure you can learn how, if you'll
practice faithfully." It was queer how her music-teacher tone crept back
into her voice. She laughed to herself to hear it. "Practice faithfully"
sounded so natural to say!

She sat down at the organ and experimented thoughtfully, trying to
reduce the old man's beloved tune to its very lowest terms. After quite
a long time she nodded and smiled.

Then began Old '61s music lessons. It was terrible work, like earning a
living with the sweat of the brow. But the two of them--the young woman
and the old man--bent to it heroically. For an hour, that first time,
the cramped old fingers felt their way over the keyboard; for an hour
Billy bent over them, patiently pointing the way. She had forgotten that
she was not to think of piano-notes now--that she had signed the Wicked
Compact. She had forgotten everything but her determination to teach Old
'61 to play "Marching through Georgia." And Old '61 had, in his turn,
forgotten things--that he was old, alone, a cumberer, everything but his
determination to learn It.

It was not a scientific lesson. It did not begin with first principles
and creep slowly upward; it began in the middle, in a splendid,
haphazard, ambitious way. The stiff old hands were gently placed in
position for the first notes of the tune, the stiff old fingers were
pressed gently down, one at a time. Over and over and over the process
was repeated. It was learning by sheer brute patience and love.

"That's all for the first lesson," Billy announced at the end of the
hour. "You've got those first notes well enough to practice them.
To-morrow we'll go a little bit farther." But she did not know the long,
patient hours between now and then that the old man would "practice,"
crooked painfully over the keys. She did not reckon on the miracle that
might be wrought out of intense desire.

The next morning Old '61 at the gate proclaimed proudly:

"I've got it! I've got it! I can play an' sing fur as we've b'en!
It's ringin' in my head all the time."

"Did the birds wake you up singing it?" Billy asked, smilingly. She,
herself, was all eagerness to learn of her pupil's progress. The lesson
began at once. Already, she found, the miracle had begun to work. The
old man sat down to the organ with a flourish that, if it had not been
full of pathos, would have been a little comedy act. After a brief
preliminary search the old fingers found their place and pounded out
triumphantly the few notes they had been taught.

"Good! good!" applauded the teacher heartily. "Why, you do it
splendidly! Now we'll go on a little farther--this finger on this note,
this one here, your thumb _here_." She stationed them carefully and
the second lesson began. It was nearer two hours than one when it ended.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Where have _you_ been, Billy?" Loraine asked at lunch. They had
all been describing their individual pursuits and experiences of the
morning.

"Oh, to a place," answered Billy lightly.

"What place?" Loraine persisted curiously.

"Well," laughed Billy, "if you must know, I've been marching
through--oh, a _place_!" she concluded hastily, repenting herself.
"It was a pretty hard place, and I'm hungry as a bear. Wish somebody'd
say, 'Won't you have another piece of pie?'"

"Won't you have another piece of pie?" laughed Loraine, and nothing
further was said of an embarrassing nature.

The summer days grew into summer weeks. Patiently and joyously Old '61
plodded his way to the sea. He practiced nearly all his waking hours,
and when he was not at the little organ, practicing, he went about
humming the beloved words. Pride and love, rather than any melody of his
cracked old voice, made a tune of them.

His progress astonished his teacher. Her praise was impetuous enough for
further and greater exertions. One day Billy said the next time should
be an exhibition, when he should play it all--from "Atlanta to the
sea"--with her as audience, not helping, but sitting in a chair
listening.

She came to the Exhibition in a white dress, with sweet-peas at her
waist. Her smiles at the foot of the steps changed to something like a
sob when she discovered that Old '61 had been decorating the organ and
the little porch. He, himself, was brushed and radiant, his old face the
face of a little child.

"The audience will sit on the steps," Billy said, a little tremulously.
"Right here. Make believe I'm rows and rows of people! Now will you
please favor us by 'Marching through Georgia'?".

He went at once to the little gayly-bedecked instrument and began to
play. The dignity and pride of the shabby old figure redeemed its
shabbiness--the fervor of the pounded notes redeemed the tune. The
audience--in "rows and rows,"--listened gravely, and at the end burst
into genuine applause. The sound swelled and multiplied oddly, and then
they saw the three figures at the gate who had listened, too. Billy was
discovered!




CHAPTER V.


They escorted Billy home. It was rather a silent walk until the end.
Loraine spoke first.

"One less in the B-Hive," she said sadly.

"Yes, I suppose I'm dropped now," responded Billy, not uncheerfully.
"Of course I've got to take the consequences of my--my crime. But I don't
care!" she added with vivacity. "I'd rather live alone in a ten-story
house than have missed that Exhibition!"

"Yes," mused Laura Ann thoughtfully, "it was a beautiful one. I'm glad
_I_ didn't miss it. When I think of what it stood for--"

She broke off suddenly and slipped her hand into Billy's arm. Another
short silence. Then Laura Ann finished: "All the work and patience it
stood for, day after day--girls, when I think of that I feel--"

"I know--all of us know," T.O. hastily interposed. "That's about the way
we all feel, I guess. No use talking about it, though. Billy's broken
the Compact and we're under oath to drop her."

"Not till we go back to work," Loraine put in emphatically, "and then
she can live next door and come in every night to tea! There's nothing
in the Compact against that, is there? Well, then, I invite you, Billy,
for the very first tea!"

"I accept!" laughed Billy. She did not seem at all depressed. In her
ears rang the pounding refrain of Old '61 marching through Georgia.

Nothing more was said on this subject. A little picnic had been planned
for the afternoon, and they went briskly about making preparations for
it, as soon as they got back to Mrs. Camp's little green house. While
they worked they discussed Amelia.

"If she hadn't gone with her mother we'd have taken her to the picnic
with us," the Talented One said, over her egg-beating. "I wonder if
Amelia likes picnics?"

"Don't! You make me feel creepy," Laura Ann laughed. "What _I_
wonder is how she'd have looked if she'd ever been born. I lay awake one
night trying to imagine Amelia."

"Blue eyes and golden hair," Loraine chimed in dreamily, "and a little
dimple in her chin."

"You needn't any of you lie awake nights imagining. I can tell you," the
Talented One said. "She has blue eyes, but her hair is brown and the
dimples are in her cheeks. Her hair just waves a little away from the
parting--it is always parted. She sits very still, sewing patchwork--her
mother told me," added the Talented One quietly. "She said she wished
she knew how to paint so she could paint Amelia's picture. She told me
where she'd like to have it hung--here in the dining-room, between the
windows. Amelia'd always been very real, she said, but the picture would
make her realer."

"Did she ever say what kind of dresses Amelia wears?" asked Laura Ann
without looking up from her stirring.

"No, I never asked, but they must be white dresses, I think,--Amelia is
such an innocent little thing," laughed T.O. softly. It was odd how they
always laughed or talked softly when it was about little make-believe
Amelia.

The picnic was in the woods, in a lovely little spot Loraine had
discovered in her wanderings. A brook babbled noisily through the spot.
They spread their lunch at the foot of a forest giant and ate it
luxuriously to the tune the brook sang. It was hard to believe they had
ever been toilers in a great city.

"There never were any public schools," murmured Loraine, lying back and
gazing into the thick mesh of leaves overhead. "Nobody ever said
'Teacher! Teacher!' to me."

"There never were any negatives to be 'touched up'--nobody ever had
their pictures taken," Laura Ann murmured, dreamy, too. "I've always
been here beside this brook, lying on my back--what a beautiful world
it's always been!"

The Talented One sat rigidly straight. "There have always been
handkerchiefs," she sighed, "and there always will be. I shall have to
go back there and sell them. When I look at all these leaves, it reminds
me--there are leaves on handkerchiefs, straggling round the
borders--ugh!"

It was foolish talk, perhaps, but it was the place and the time for
foolish talk. After a little more of it they drifted apart, wandering
this way and that in a delightful, aimless way. So little of their four
lives had been aimless or especially delightful that they reveled in the
sweet opportunity. Loraine wandered farthest. She came after awhile to a
clearing where a small pond glimmered redly with the parting rays of the
sun. A great boy lounged beside the pond dangling a pole. Loraine
recognized him as Jane Cotton's Sam.

"Oh!" she said, "now I've made a noise and scared away your fish!"

"Ain't any fish," muttered the boy. He did not turn around. The pole
slanted further and further, till it lay on the bank beside the boy.

"Oh, maybe there are, if you wait long enough--and nobody comes crashing
through the bushes! I don't suppose--I mean if you are not going to use
it any more yourself--" Loraine looked toward the idle pole. "I never
fished in my life," she explained. The boy understood with remarkable
quickness.

"You mean you'd like to try it?" he asked, and this time turned round.
It was not at all a bad face on close inspection, Loraine decided. The
veil of sullenness had lifted a little.

[Illustration: "I NEVER FISHED IN MY LIFE," SHE EXPLAINED.]

"Oh, but I just would! Only if I should have an accident and catch
anything, whatever would I do! They--they are always cold and clammy,
aren't they?"

Jane Cotton's Sam laughed outright, and Loraine decided that it was a
very good face.

"I'll 'tend to all you catch," the boy said. He was busily baiting the
hook; now he extended the pole to her.

"Wiggle it--up and down a little, like this," he directed, "and don't
make any more noise than you can help. If you feel a bite, let me know."

"But I don't see how I can feel a bite unless they bite me--"

Again the boy laughed wholesomely. They were getting acquainted. The
fishing began, and for what seemed to her a long time Loraine sat
absolutely still, dangling the pole. Nothing happened for a discouraging
while. Then Loraine whispered: "I feel a bite, but it's on my wrist! If
it's a mosquito I wish you would 'shoo' it off."

Another wait. Then a real bite in the right place. In another moment
Loraine landed a wriggling little fish in the grass. She did not squeal
nor shudder, but sat regarding it with gentle pride.

"Poor little thing! I suppose I ought to put you back, but you're my
first and only fish, and I've _got_ to carry you home for the girls
to see. You'll have to forgive me this time!" She turned to the boy.
"I suppose he ought to be dressed, or undressed, or something, before
he's fried, oughtn't he? I thought I'd like to fry him for breakfast,
to surprise the girls--"

"I'll dress him for you," Jane Cotton's Sam said eagerly, "and bring
him over in the morning in plenty o' time."

"Thank you," Loraine said heartily. "Now you'll have to let me do
something for you. 'Turn about is fair play.' Couldn't I--" She
hesitated, looking out over the still reddened water rather than at the
boy's face. "Couldn't I help you in some way with your studies? That's
my business, you know. It would really be doing me a kindness, for I may
get all out of practice unless I teach somebody something!" Had Loraine,
too, forgotten the Compact on the screen door?

The boy fidgeted, then burst out angrily: "I s'pose they've all been
telling you I failed up in my exams? They have, haven't they? You
_knew_ it, didn't you?"

"Yes," Loraine answered quietly. "But I've heard a good many worse
things in my life. I've heard of boys that smoked and drank and--and
_stole_. What does missing a few examinations amount to beside
things like those?" But the boy did not seem to have been listening to
anything except his own angry thoughts. All his sun-browned young face
was flooded with red; he had run his fingers through his hair till it
stood up fiercely.

"They needn't trouble themselves 'bout me, nor you needn't, nor anybody
needn't!" he declaimed loudly. "Anybody'd think they were saints
themselves!"

"And _I_ was a saint and everybody was saints!" laughed Loraine
softly. But Jane Cotton's Sam did not laugh. He went striding away into
the woods, his head flung up high. Loraine and the little dead fish were
left behind. Oddly the girl was not thinking of the boy's rudeness in
return for her kind offer of help, but of the flash of spirit in his
eyes. It augured well for him, she was thinking, for spirit was spirit,
although "gone wrong." In the right place, it should spur him on to a
second attempt to get into college. What if she were to persist in her
offer--were to work with him, urge him to work with her?

But he had chosen to spurn her advances. She shook her head sadly. On
his own head be it. She turned her attention to the little dead fish.

"You poor dear, you look so dead and forlorn--what am I going to do with
you? Someway you've got to go home with me and be fried." She took him
up gingerly, but dropped him again--he was so slippery and damp! Wrap
him in her handkerchief? But she had no pocket and she could never,
never carry him in her sleeve which she had adopted as a pocket. So then
she must leave him, must she? Poor little useless sacrifice!

Back at the picnic spot the girls were waiting for her. They went home
in the late, sweet twilight.

A letter was tucked under the screen door where some friendly neighbor
had left it. "Miss Thomasia O. Brown," Billy read aloud, and waved the
letter in triumph, for the secret was out. The 'T' in T.O. stood for
Thomasia!

"Well?" bristled the Talented One, "it had to stand for something,
didn't it? It's awful, I know, but _I'm_ not to blame--I didn't
name myself, did I? I wish people could," she added with a sigh.

"Is it for a _Thomas?_" questioned Laura Ann curiously.

Thomasia nodded: "There was always a Thomas in the family until they got
to me. They did the best they could to make me one." She was opening the
letter with careful precision. "Why, of course, it's from Mrs. Camp!"
she cried delightedly.

"My dear, I hope you are well and your friends have come, and Jane
Cotton's Sam has not forgotten to paint the pump. I arrived here safely
after a very long journey--my dear, I never dreamed the world was so
big! This part of it is well enough, but give me Placid Pond! Now I am
going to tell you something, and you may laugh all you're a mind to--I
sha'n't hear! What I'm going to tell is, _Amelia came_, too. After
I'd got good and settled down on the cars I looked up and knew she was
sitting right opposite, on the seat I'd turned over. She seemed
_there_--and you may laugh, my dear. I laughed, I was so pleased to
have Amelia along. John doesn't know she came--Amelia never makes a mite
of trouble! But everywhere I go she goes, my dear. I shouldn't tell you
if I didn't feel you'd understand. If he hasn't painted it yet, the blue
paint is on a shelf in the woodhouse, and you can paint it. I'm afraid
Jane Cotton's Sam won't ever amount to much. Poor Jane!"

Thomasia read the letter aloud, and at this point Loraine interposed
warmly: "Jane Cotton's Sam is abused! It's a shame everybody groans over
him--_I_ like him. If there isn't a lot of good in him, then I don't
know how to read human nature, that's all."

The next morning very early someone knocked at the kitchen door. It was
Laura Ann's turn to make the fire, and she answered the knock. Jane
Cotton's Sam stood on the steps outside. He had a mysterious little
package in his hand. He looked up eagerly, but it was evident from the
disappointed look on his face that Laura Ann was the wrong girl. And he
did not know the right one's name!

"Good-morning!" nodded Laura Ann, sublimely unconscious of the
soot-patch over her nose.

"Good-morning. I'd like to see--I've brought something for the one that
teaches school."

"Loraine? But she isn't up yet--"

"Yes, I am up, too," called a voice overhead, "but I won't be long! I'll
be _down_."

It was a little fish, dressed and ready to fry, that was in the tiny
bundle. The boy extended it blushingly. Then his eyes lifted to
Loraine's in frank petition for pardon.

"I was mighty rude," he said. "I went back to the pond to say so, but
you were gone. I beg your pardon."

She liked the tone of his voice and his good red blushes. "That's all
right," she nodded reassuringly. But he did not go away. There was
something else.

"If--you know what you said? If you'd offer _again_--"

Loraine glanced over her shoulder. Laura Ann was rattling stove-lids at
the other end of the kitchen. "I offer _now_," Loraine said in a
low voice.

"Then I accept." The boy's voice was eager. "I'll study like everything!
I thought about it in the night--I thought I'd like to surprise my
mother. If I could get into college next year--" His eyes shone. "Oh I
say, I'd do 'most anything for that!"

The little plan was hurriedly made, in low tones, there on Emmeline
Camp's little doorsteps. The boy was to take his books to the pond where
Loraine had caught her fish. He was to study there alone for a time
every day, and in the afternoon she was to stroll that way and go over
the work with him and set him right in all the wrong places.

"It was in Latin and mathematics I failed up," Jane Cotton's Sam
explained.

"It's Latin and mathematics we'll tackle!" softly laughed Loraine.
"You wait--you see--you _grind!_"

He strode away, whistling, and the tune was full of courage and
determination. Loraine smiled as she listened. She stood a moment, then
opened the screen door and went in. The "Compact" swung and tilted with
the jolt of her energetic movements. She adjusted it with a queer little
smile.

For summer days on summer days the covert, earnest lessons went on
beside the bit of sunny water. Teacher and pupil pored intently over the
problems and difficult passages, and steadily the pupil's courage grew.
The old sullen look had vanished--Jane Cotton's Sam put on manliness and
a splendid swing to his shoulders. In her heart Loraine exulted. What if
she were disobeying the Compact--death to the Wicked Compact!

Laura Ann suspected, but for reasons of her own kept her own counsel.
She had begun to suspect, when Jane Cotton's Sam brought the little
fish. At that time the "reasons of her own" had begun to influence her
and she had omitted to mention to Billy and T.O. that the boy had stood
on the doorsteps in earnest conversation with Loraine. Mentioning it to
Billy might not, indeed, have mattered, since Billy was already an
"outsider." But Loraine might not want T.O. to know, anyway.

It was significant that Laura Ann, in going in and out, now chose to
ignore the gayly-illuminated placard that swung on the door--that she
herself had adorned and hung there. But she did not go in and out as
much now; for whole mornings she slipped away to a little attic room
upstairs and busied herself alone.

It was getting grievously near the time to go back to the great city
again. Emmeline Camp was coming back then.

All but T.O. mourned audibly the rapidly lessening days, but T.O. made
no useless laments. One day she surprised them.

"Girls, I _want_ to go back!" she announced. "I shall be ready when
it's time--now anybody can say what anybody pleases. Scoff at me--do.
I expect it! But I'm getting homesick to see a street-car and a--a
policeman! It's lovely and peaceful here, but I've had my fill of it
now--I want to go home and bump into crowds and hear big, stirry noises.
It's different with you girls--you weren't born in the city; you didn't
play with street-cars and policemen and get sung to sleep by the noises!
I was tired--tired--and now I'm rested. I've had a perfectly beautiful
time, but I shall be ready to go back. Honestly, girls, it would break
my heart not to!"

It was so much like T.O., Billy said, to keep all her feelings to
herself and then suddenly spring them on people like that, and take
people's breath away. Billy did not keep things to herself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jane Cotton came up the kitchen path one day when all but Loraine were
sitting on the doorsteps--Loraine had strolled nonchalantly down the
street as her afternoon habit was.

"Well, I've found out!" announced Jane Cotton. She was beaming; her
sallow face was oddly cleared and lighted--her lips trembled with
eagerness to deliver her news. "I've _found out_! Where's the rest
o' you?" She counted them over. "It's the rest o' you I want--well, you
tell her I've found out. Tell her I hardly slept a wink last night,
I was so happy! Tell her I _bless_ her, and I know the Lord will.
They didn't want me to know yet but I couldn't help finding out. And
they won't mind when they know how happy it's made me--oh, I ain't
afraid but he'll pass this time! I know he will--I know it! You tell her
she's saved my boy." And without further delay the slender figure turned
and walked jubilantly down the path. It was as if she marched to the
melody of the joy in her heart.

They looked at each other silently, then at the Wicked Compact behind
them. There did not seem any explanation needed.

"Another one dropped," murmured T.O. sighingly. But Laura Ann said
nothing.




CHAPTER VI.


Laura Ann stole quietly away and went upstairs to the little attic room.
Close by the window was a rough little easel arrangement with a picture
on it. Laura Ann stood regarding it thoughtfully. "I wonder"--she smiled
at the whimsy of the thought--"I wonder if it looks like Amelia," she
murmured.

It was not a wonderful picture. No committee would have hung it on a
"line." There were rather glaring errors in it of draughtsmanship and
coloring. But the face of the girl in it was appealingly sweet--brown
hair, blue eyes, little round chin. Laura Ann had not dared to put in
the dimples.

"Dimples need a master," she said, "besides, they only show when you
smile, and I don't believe Amelia smiles very often!"

She sat down and took up a brush. The picture was nearly done, but she
found touches to be added here and there. There might be a stray
lock--there, like that. And a little bit more shade under the chin, and
the wistful droop of the mouth relieved, oh, a very little bit! Amelia
looked so serious.

"Poor little thing! Well, it's a serious matter to be a dream-child,
with not an ounce of good red blood in your veins."

Laura Ann meant to slip back after they had started for the station, on
the last day, and hang the picture in the little sunny dining-room. She
did not want the girls to know there was a picture. But still--a new
thought had begun to obtrude itself unwelcomely. Was painting Amelia's
portrait a breach, too, of the Compact? She had undertaken it as a
little "offering" to Mrs. Camp, to show her own individual gratitude for
her own share of the dear little green cottage all these beautiful
weeks--T.O. had said Mrs. Camp had longed for a picture. But the fact
that it had taken many patient hours of work "unto others," was not to
be overlooked. If it had broken the rules of the Wicked Compact, and she
went back to the B-Hive without letting the girls know of it--oh, hum!
of course that would be another "wicked compact"! She would have to let
them know--and she didn't want to let them know--oh, dear!

Suddenly Laura Ann dropped her paints and gave herself up to laughter.
She had remembered that only T.O.--Thomasia O.--would be left now in the
B-Hive! For all the rest had broken the Compact. Thomasia O., living all
alone in the dear, shabby little rooms, presented a funny picture, for
of them all she was least fitted to live alone. Even Billy could do
better.

"The rest of us will live together," laughed Laura Ann. "There's nothing
to prevent that, if we live outside the old B-Hive. We'll start a new
B-Hive! Poor Thomasia O.!"

They would miss T.O. very much indeed--well, they could invite her in to
tea and keep her all night! In spite of the wicked old Compact, they
would keep together. "And we'll never," vowed Laura Ann for them all,
"sign any more nefarious bonds!"

She hung the picture of Amelia on the wall when they were all away, and
then went away herself. She stayed away until nearly dark. Thomasia O.
went to meet her.

"I knew it all the time," she said quietly, without preface of any kind.
"It's a perfect likeness."

"You knew it?" said Laura Ann.

"Yes, I was prowling 'round one day, to see what attics were like, and
I found Amelia. Only her hair and her eyes, then, but I knew her. I'm
so glad poor Mrs. Camp will have that picture to help her bear her
troubles!"

[Illustration: THE PICTURE WAS NEARLY DONE.]

"Poor"--"troubles." This was all enigma to Laura Ann. But she wisely
waited to be enlightened. She had divined the moment she saw T.O. that
the girl was unusually disturbed. This was true.

"I've had two letters--the first one came three weeks ago from her
brother. I didn't want to spoil your good time, telling sad things,
so I kept it to myself--Laura Ann, that woman _mothered_ me!"

Laura Ann stood still. "Do you mean Mrs. Camp? Is she--dead?" But the
other did not seem to hear. She ran on in a low, troubled voice.

"She bathed my ankle, and said 'My dear,' and waited on me, when she'd
never set eyes on me in her life before. How did she know but that I was
an--an _impostor_? And she let us have her dear little house to live
in--"

"Yes, yes--oh, yes, she let _me_ live in it!" Laura Ann interposed.
"You ought to have told us she was dead."

"She isn't dead. She's fallen downstairs and broken her hip. The doctor
says it's so bad she won't ever walk again without crutches, her brother
wrote. He said he wanted her to stay and live with him, but she wouldn't
listen to it. She wanted to come home as soon as she possibly could. So
she's coming--he's coming with her, to 'start' her."

T.O. fingered a letter in her hand in a nervous, undecided way, as if
she were half inclined to read it to the other girl. It was not Emmeline
Camp's brother's letter. It had come ten days ago, and she herself knew
it by heart. How many, many times she had read it! She had cried over
the wistful cry in it, and over Amelia's death--for the letter said that
Amelia was dead.

"My dear," it said, "I've lost Amelia--you'd think she would have stood
by her mother in her trouble, wouldn't you? But she hasn't been near me
since. It seems queer--perhaps after people break their hips they can't
'feel' anything else but their hips! Perhaps it breaks their
imaginations. Anyway, Amelia's dead, my dear. Sometimes I think mebbe
I'd ought to be, too--a lone little woman like me, without a chick or a
child. Old women with children can afford to tumble downstairs, but not
my kind of old women. John is real good. He wants me to stay here, but I
can't--I can't, I can't, my dear! I've got to be where I can limp out to
the old pump and the gate and the orchard, on my crutches--I've got to
see the old hills I was born in, and Old '61 marching past the house,
and the old neighbors--I've got to die at _home_, my dear. So John
can't keep me. I wish I was going to find you there. I keep thinking how
beautiful it would be. You'd be out to the gate waiting, the way
people's daughters wait for them. And mebbe you'd have the kettle all
hot and we'd have a cup of tea together just as if I was the mother and
you was--Amelia! All the way home I should be thinking about your being
there. It's queer, isn't it, you went limping in that gate first, and
now it's me? A good many things are queer, and some are kind of
desolate. I've decided, my dear, that daughters have to be the kind that
are born, to stay by a body in trouble. They have to be made of flesh
and blood, my dear--and Amelia wasn't!

"I've written this a little to a time, laying on my back. Mebbe you
won't ever read it. Mebbe I won't ever see you again, but you will
remember, my dear, that I've loved you ever since I took off your
stocking and saw your poor, sprained ankle. If the Lord would perform
a miracle for me, I'd ask for it to be the bringing of Amelia to life
and finding her you."

T.O. did not show the letter to Laura Ann. She put it in her pocket
again, and they walked home slowly, talking of Mrs. Camp's sad accident.
At the supper table it was voted that they all write a joint letter of
sympathy to her, and express, at the same time, their united and
separate thanks for her kindness to them in lending them her home.

Loraine wrote the letter, Laura Ann copied it, they all signed it. Into
cold pen-and-ink words they tried to diffuse warmth and gratitude and
sympathy, but the result was not very satisfying, as such results rarely
are. Still, it was all they could do. Billy and Laura Ann went off to
mail it.

"Do you begin to feel lonesome?" laughed Loraine softly, as she and T.O.
sat on the steps in the dark. "Thinking of being left all alone in the
Hive, I mean? The rest of us begin to feel lonesome, thinking of being
left out! We had a grist of good times all together, didn't we? Remember
the little 'treats' when you always brought home olives, and Billy sage
cheese? Laura Ann used to change about--sometimes eclairs, sometimes
sauerkraut! Always sardines for me. Oh, _do_ you remember the treat
with a capital 'T,' when we had ice cream and angel cake? And Billy
wanted to divide the hole so as not to waste anything--there, I don't
believe you've heard a word I said!"

She had not, for she was not there. Loraine put out her hand in the
darkness, but could not find her. She had slipped away unceremoniously.

She was down in the road, walking fast and hard. The battle was on
again.

"I thought I had it all decided--I _did_ have! Why do I have to
decide it over again?" she was saying stormily to herself. "I said I'd
do it, and I'm going to do it--what am I down here fighting in the dark
for?" But still she fought on.

It was so still about her, and with all her girl's heart she longed for
noise again--car-bells and rattling wheels and din of men's voices.
There were such wide spaces all about, and she longed for narrow
spaces--for rows on rows of houses and people coming and going. It was
the city-blood in her asserting itself. She had had her breath of space
and freedom and green, growing things, and exulted in it while it
lasted. Now she pined for her native streets. But all the sympathy and
gratitude in her went out to the little old woman who was coming home to
a lonely home--whose one dream-child was dead.

No one had ever really needed her before--to be needed appealed to her
strongly. And in the short time between her own coming to Placid Pond
and the coming of the other girls, a bond of real affection had been
established between Mrs. Camp and herself.

But hadn't she been over all this before? Long ago she had decided what
to do. Now, suddenly, she wheeled in the dark road and went hurrying in
the other direction. She would go back to Loraine on the doorstep, and
laugh and talk. She had decided "for good."

The stars came trooping out, and she lifted her face to them with a new
sense of peace. They were such friendly, twinkling little stars.

T.O. was humming a lilty little tune when she came up the path in the
starlight and joined Loraine again on the doorstep.

The other two girls were coming slowly back from the little country post
office, both to hurry and have the pleasant walk over. Billy had been
saying nice things about the portrait of Amelia they had found hanging
on the wall.

"It's a dear!" she said heartily. "I wish I could make a picture like
that."

"You've made one a thousand times better!" cried Laura Ann. "I saw it
this afternoon."

"_Me_--make a picture?" Billy's voice was incredulous. "I couldn't
draw my breath straight!"

"It was a beautiful one. I stood still and looked at it. Your background
was fine, dear--woods banked against a late afternoon sky, with bits of
red light straggling through the branches, a little box of a house in
the foreground, with patches of new shingles on the 'cover'; a crooked
little front path, a funny little well, a little rosebush all a flame of
color--"

"Mercy!" Billy's little triangle of a face put on alarm. Was Laura Ann
losing her mind?

"But that--all that--was only the setting. The heart of the picture,
dear, was an old man marching up and down the path--did I say it was a
moving picture? He was whistling a tune in a wheezy way, and keeping
step to it grandly. Once he seemed to lose a few notes; then he went
into a little box of a house, and I heard an organ--"

"Oh!" breathed Billy, assured of the other's sanity, "you mean Old '61
practicing! That's the way he does--he's learning to march through
Georgia without the organ, but he misses a step or two sometimes.
_That_ was the picture, was it?"

"It was a beautiful one," Laura Ann said softly. "You needn't tell me
you can't paint, Billy! That's the kind of pictures we shall find
hanging in the Great Picture Gallery."

They walked on for a little in silence, with only the piping chorus of
the little night creatures in their ears. The sweet, cool damp was in
their faces.

"Here we are at Jane Cotton's Sam's," Billy whispered by and by, to
break the spell. She could not have told why she whispered.

"So we are. Billy, look, he's studying like a trooper! That boy is going
to walk straight into college in September! Let's go straight home and
hug Loraine--come on! Take hold of my hand, and we'll run."

"Wait--wait! Look, there's another of your pictures, Laura Ann!" Billy's
lips were close to the other's ear; Billy was pointing. Into the little
lighted room where Jane Cotton's Sam sat poring over a book, had come
another figure. As they looked, it stopped beside the boy and bent over
him.

"That's just the setting--all that," Laura Ann murmured. "The heart of
the picture is her face, Billy!" For Jane Cotton's face was radiant.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day at last came for their return to the city and to the work they
were so much better able to do. The little, green-painted house was in
spotless order to leave behind. As Mrs. Camp was to come the following
day, they had filled the little pantry with food--not remarkably light
cake or bread, not especially flaky piecrust, but everything flavored
with sympathy and gratitude and good will.

"Go on, all of you; I'll catch up," Billy said, as they stood on the
steps with the door locked behind them. "When you get out of sight I'm
going to kiss the house good-by!"

"T.O. had better stay behind with you, to kiss the pump!" Loraine said.
"Or we'll all stay--I guess we can all find something to kiss."

"Did anybody think to take down the Wicked Compact?" demanded Laura Ann
suddenly. "It would be awful to leave that behind."

They were at the gate. T.O. stopped suddenly, pointing. What they saw
was a tiny, tiny mound, rounded symmetrically. "There it lies--I buried
it," T.O. said briefly, but added, "And let no one keep its grave
green!" They looked at her a little curiously. Perhaps they were
thinking that it might have been appropriate for her to take it home
with her and hang it on the wall to keep her company in the lonely
little B-Hive. But they only laughed and tramped on cheerfully to the
station. They were a little late, and had to run the last of the way.
The train was already in, and they scrambled aboard.

"Well, here we are leaving Eldorado!" sighed breathlessly Loraine.

"And all of us heart-broken but T.O.--girls, where's T.O.?"

She was not there. The train was getting under way. In a flurry they
huddled to the windows.

"Good-by! Good-by!" shouted a gay voice from the platform. A little
white envelope flew in at one of the open windows. T.O., quite calm
and unexcited, stood out there waving to them.

"What in the world!" ejaculated Laura Ann, then stopped. For she alone
could see a little ray of light. "Read the letter," she said more
quietly. "The letter will tell us."

They all read it together, their heads bunched closely.

"Dear girls, I'm going to stay. I never was needed before, but I guess
I am now. And maybe you'll think it's funny, but I'm _wanted_! An
imaginary daughter can't wait on a poor little cripple--it takes the
flesh-and-blood kind. I found out she wanted me, and so I'm going to
stay. It would have been lonesome, anyway, all alone in the Hive!
I bequeath all my rights to you--"

"As if she had any now, any more than the rest of us!" muttered Billy
fiercely, her eyes full of tears.

"Sometimes when you're going and coming, some o' you listen to the
car-wires sing, for me, and the wheels rattle," the letter went on.
"Bump into somebody sometime for me! Good-by. You're all of you dears.

"Amelia."

At the signature they choked a little, and looked away at the flying
landscape without seeing it at all. Laura Ann saw another picture--a
girl waiting at a little gate. Woods and dusty road and humble little
homes for background, and an old stage rattling into view in the
foreground. She saw it stop--in the picture--and a helpless little old
figure be taken out. She saw the girl at the gate spring forward and
hold out her hands. But the heart of the picture was the face of the
little old woman on crutches. It was another picture for the Grand
Gallery.

[Illustration]









End of Project Gutenberg's Four Girls and a Compact, by Annie Hamilton Donnell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR GIRLS AND A COMPACT ***

***** This file should be named 9505.txt or 9505.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/5/0/9505/

Produced by Joel Erickson, David Garcia and PG Distributed Proofreaders
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

