The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ride to the Lady, by Helen Gray Cone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ride to the Lady
       and Other Poems

Author: Helen Gray Cone

Posting Date: August 16, 2012 [EBook #9559]
Release Date: December, 2005
First Posted: October 8, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIDE TO THE LADY ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Josephine Paolucci, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders











THE RIDE TO THE LADY

And Other Poems

BY

HELEN GRAY CONE

1891







  CONTENTS

  The Ride to the Lady

  The First Guest

  Silence

  Arraignment

  The Going Out of the Tide

  King Raedwald

  Ivo of Chartres

  Madonna Pia

  Two Moods of Failure

  The Story of the "Orient"

  A Resurrection

  The Glorious Company

  The Trumpeter

  Comrades

  The House of Hate

  The Arrowmaker

  A Nest in a Lyre

  Thisbe

  The Spring Beauties

  Kinship

  Compensation

  When Willows Green

  At the Parting of the Ways

  The Fair Gray Lady

  The Encounter.

  Summer Hours

  Love Unsung

  The Wish for a Chaplet

  Sonnets:
  The Torch Race
  To Sleep
  Sister Snow
  The Contrast
  A Mystery
  Triumph
  In Winter, with the Book we had in Spring
  Sere Wisdom
  Isolation
  The Lost Dryad
  The Gifts of the Oak
  The Strayed Singer
  The Immortal Word




  THE RIDE TO THE LADY


  "Now since mine even is come at last,--
  For I have been the sport of steel,
  And hot life ebbeth from me fast,
  And I in saddle roll and reel,--
  Come bind me, bind me on my steed!
  Of fingering leech I have no need!"
  The chaplain clasped his mailed knee.
  "Nor need I more thy whine and thee!
  No time is left my sins to tell;
  But look ye bind me, bind me well!"
  They bound him strong with leathern thong,
  For the ride to the lady should be long.

  Day was dying; the poplars fled,
  Thin as ghosts, on a sky blood-red;
  Out of the sky the fierce hue fell,
  And made the streams as the streams of hell.
  All his thoughts as a river flowed,
  Flowed aflame as fleet he rode,
  Onward flowed to her abode,
  Ceased at her feet, mirrored her face.
  (Viewless Death apace, apace,
  Rode behind him in that race.)

  "Face, mine own, mine alone,
  Trembling lips my lips have known,
  Birdlike stir of the dove-soft eyne
  Under the kisses that make them mine!
  Only of thee, of thee, my need!
  Only to thee, to thee, I speed!"
  The Cross flashed by at the highway's turn;
  In a beam of the moon the Face shone stern.

  Far behind had the fight's din died;
  The shuddering stars in the welkin wide
  Crowded, crowded, to see him ride.
  The beating hearts of the stars aloof
  kept time to the beat of the horse's hoof,
  "What is the throb that thrills so sweet?
  Heart of my lady, I feel it beat!"
  But his own strong pulse the fainter fell,
  Like the failing tongue of a hushing bell.
  The flank of the great-limbed steed was wet
  Not alone with the started sweat.

  Fast, and fast, and the thick black wood
  Arched its cowl like a black friar's hood;
  Fast, and fast, and they plunged therein,--
  But the viewless rider rode to win,
  Out of the wood to the highway's light
  Galloped the great-limbed steed in fright;
  The mail clashed cold, and the sad owl cried,
  And the weight of the dead oppressed his side.

  Fast, and fast, by the road he knew;
  And slow, and slow, the stars withdrew;
  And the waiting heaven turned weirdly blue,
  As a garment worn of a wizard grim.
  He neighed at the gate in the morning dim.

  She heard no sound before her gate,
  Though very quiet was her bower.
  All was as her hand had left it late:
  The needle slept on the broidered vine,
  Where the hammer and spikes of the passion-flower
  Her fashioning did wait.
  On the couch lay something fair,
  With steadfast lips and veiled eyne;

  But the lady was not there,
  On the wings of shrift and prayer,
  Pure as winds that winnow snow,
  Her soul had risen twelve hours ago.
  The burdened steed at the barred gate stood,
  No whit the nearer to his goal.
  Now God's great grace assoil the soul
  That went out in the wood!




  THE FIRST GUEST


  When the house is finished, Death enters.
  _Eastern Proverb_

  Life's House being ready all,
  Each chamber fair and dumb,
  Ere life, the Lord, is come
  With pomp into his hall,--
  Ere Toil has trod the floors,
  Ere Love has lit the fires,
  Or young great-eyed Desires
  Have, timid, tried the doors;
  Or from east-window leaned
  One Hope, to greet the sun,
  Or one gray Sorrow screened
  Her sight against the west,--
  Then enters the first guest,
  The House of life being done.

  He waits there in the shade.
  I deem he is Life's twin,
  For whom the house was made.
  Whatever his true name,
  Be sure, to enter in
  He has both key and claim.

  The daybeams, free of fear,
  Creep drowsy toward his feet;
  His heart were heard to beat,
  Were any there to hear;
  Ah, not for ends malign,
  Like wild thing crouched in lair,
  Or watcher of a snare,
  But with a friend's design
  He lurks in shadow there!

  He goes not to the gates
  To welcome any other,
  Nay, not Lord Life, his brother;
  But still his hour awaits
  Each several guest to find
  Alone, yea, quite alone;
  Pacing with pensive mind
  The cloister's echoing stone,
  Or singing, unaware,
  At the turning of the stair
  Tis truth, though we forget,
  In Life's House enters none
  Who shall that seeker shun,
  Who shall not so be met.
  "Is this mine hour?" each saith.
  "So be it, gentle Death!"
  Each has his way to end,
  Encountering this friend.
  Griefs die to memories mild;
  Hope turns a weaned child;
  Love shines a spirit white,
  With eyes of deepened light.
  When many a guest has passed,
  Some day 'tis Life's at last
  To front the face of Death.
  Then, casements closed, men say:
  "Lord Life is gone away;
  He went, we trust and pray,
  To God, who gave him breath."
  Beginning, End, He is:
  Are not these sons both His?
  Lo, these with Him are one!
  To phrase it so were best:
  God's self is that first Guest,
  The House of Life being done!




  SILENCE


  Why should I sing of earth or heaven? not rather rest,
  Powerless to speak of that which hath my soul possessed,--
  For full possession dumb? Yea, Silence, that were best.

  And though for what it failed to sound I brake the string,
  And dashed the sweet lute down, a too much fingered thing,
  And found a wild new voice,--oh, still, why should I sing?

  An earth-song could I make, strange as the breath of earth,
  Filled with the great calm joy of life and death and birth?
  Yet, were it less than this, the song were little worth.

  For this the fields caress; brown clods tell each to each;
  Sad-colored leaves have sense whereto I cannot reach;
  Spiced everlasting-flowers outstrip my range of speech.

  A heaven-song could I make, all fire that yet was peace,
  And tenderness not lost, though glory did increase?
  But were it less than this, 't were well the song should cease.

  For this the still west saith, with plumy flames bestrewn;
  Heaven's body sapphire-clear, at stirless height of noon;
  The cloud where lightnings pulse, beside the untroubled moon.

  I will not sing of earth or heaven, but rather rest,
  Rapt by the face of heaven, and hold on earth's warm breast.
  Hushed lips, a beating heart, yea, Silence, that were best.




  ARRAIGNMENT


  "Not ye who have stoned, not ye who have smitten us," cry
  The sad, great souls, as they go out hence into dark,
  "Not ye we accuse, though for you was our passion borne;
  And ye we reproach not, who silently passed us by.
  We forgive blind eyes and the ears that would not hark,
  The careless and causeless hate and the shallow scorn.

  "But ye, who have seemed to know us, have seen and heard;
  Who have set us at feasts and have crowned with the costly rose;
  Who have spread us the purple of praises beneath our feet;
  Yet guessed not the word that we spake was a living word,
  Applauding the sound,--we account you as worse than foes!
  We sobbed you our message; ye said, 'It is song, and sweet!'"




  THE GOING OUT OF THE TIDE


  The eastern heaven was all faint amethyst,
  Whereon the moon hung dreaming in the mist;
  To north yet drifted one long delicate plume
  Of roseate cloud; like snow the ocean-spume.

  Now when the first foreboding swiftly ran
  Through the loud-glorying sea that it began
  To lose its late gained lordship of the land,
  Uprose the billow like an angered man,
  And flung its prone strength far along the sand;
  Almost, almost to the old bound, the dark
  And taunting triumph-mark.

  But no, no, no! and slow, and slow, and slow,
  Like a heart losing hold, this wave must go,--
  Must go, must go,--dragged heavily back, back,
  Beneath the next wave plunging on its track,
  Charging, with thunderous and defiant shout,
  To fore-determined rout.

  Again, again the unexhausted main
  Renews fierce effort, drawing force unguessed
  From awful deeps of its mysterious breast:
  Like arms of passionate protest, tossed in vain,
  The spray upflings above the billow's crest.
  Again the appulse, again the backward strain--
  Till ocean must have rest.

  With one abandoned movement, swift and wild,--
  As though bowed head and outstretched arms it laid
  On the earth's lap, soft sobbing,--hushed and stayed,
  The great sea quiets, like a soothed child.
  Ha! what sharp memory clove the calm, and drave
  This last fleet furious wave?

  On, on, endures the struggle into night,
  Ancient as Time, yet fresh as the fresh hour;
  As oft repeated since the birth of light
  As the strong agony and mortal fight
  Of human souls, blind-reaching, with the Power
  Aloof, unmoved, impossible to cross,
  Whose law is seeming loss.

  Low-sunken from the longed-for triumph-mark;
  The spent sea sighs as one that grieves in sleep.
  The unveiled moon along the rippling plain
  Casts many a keen, cold, shifting silvery spark,
  Wild as the pulses of strange joy, that leap
  Even in the quick of pain.

  And she compelling, she that stands for law,--
  As law for Will eternal,--perfect, clear,
  And uncompassionate shines: to her appear
  Vast sequences close-linked without a flaw.
  All past despairs of ocean unforgot,
  All raptures past, serene her light she gives,
  The moon too high for pity, since she lives
  Aware that loss is not.




  KING RAEDWALD


  Will you hear now the speech of King Raedwald,--heathen Raedwald,
        the simple yet wise?
  He, the ruler of North-folk and South-folk, a man open-browed
        as the skies,
  Held the eyes of the eager Italians with his blue, bold,
        Englishman's eyes.

  In his hall, on his throne, so he sat, with the light of the fire
        on him full:
  Colored bright as the ring of red gold on his hand, fit to buffet
        a bull,
  Was the mane that grew down on his neck, was the beard he would
        pondering pull.

  To the priests, to the eager Italians, thus fearless less he poured
        his free speech;
  "O my honey-tongued fathers, I turn not away from the faith that ye
        teach!
  Not the less hath a man many moods, and may ask a religion for each.

  "Grant that all things are well with the realm on a delicate day
        of the spring,
  Easter month, time of hopes and of swallows!
         The praises, the psalms that ye sing,
  As in pleasant accord they float heavenward, are good in the ears
        of the king.

  "Then the heart bubbles forth with clear waters, to the time
        of this wonder-word Peace,
  From the chanting and preaching whereof ye who serve the
        white Christ never cease;
  And your curly, soft incense ascending enwraps my content
        like a fleece.

  "But a churl comes adrip from the rivers, pants me out, fallen
        spent on the floor,
  'O King Raedwald, Northumberland marches, and to-morrow knocks
        hard at thy door,
  Hot for melting thy crown on the hearth!'
          Then commend me to Woden and Thor!

  "Could I sit then and listen to preachments on turning the cheek
        to the blow,
  And saying a prayer for the smiter, and holding my seen treasure low
  For the sake of a treasure unseen? By the sledge of the Thunderer, no!

  "For my thought flashes out as a sword, cleaving counsel as
        clottage of cream;
  And your incense and chanting are but as the smoke of burnt
        towns and the scream;
  And I quaff me the thick mead of triumph from enemies' skulls
        in my dream!

  "And 'tis therefore this day I resolve me,--for King Raedwald
        will cringe not, nor lie!--
  I will bring back the altar  of Woden; in the temple will have it,
        hard by
  The new altar of this your white Christ. As my mood may decide,
        worship I!"

  So he spake in his large self-reliance,--he, a man open-browed
        as the skies;
  Would not measure his soul by a standard that was womanish-weak
        to his eyes,
  Smite his breast and go on with his sinning,--savage Raedwald,
        the simple yet wise!

  And the centuries bloom o'er his barrow. But for us,--have we
        mastered it quite,
  The old riddle, that sweet is strong's outcome, the old marvel,
        that meekness is might,
  That the child is the leader of lions, that forgiveness is force
        at its height?

  When we summon the shade of rude Raedwald, in his candor how
        king-like he towers!
  Have the centuries, over his slumber, only borne sterile falsehoods
        for flowers?
  Pray you, what if Christ found him the nobler, having weighed his
        frank manhood with ours?




  IVO OF CHARTRES


  Now may it please my lord, Louis the king,
    Lily of Christ and France! riding his quest,
  I, Bishop Ivo, saw a wondrous thing.

    There was no light of sun left in the west,
  And slowly did the moon's new light increase.
    Heaven, without cloud, above the near hill's crest,
  Lay passion purple in a breathless peace.
    Stars started like still tears, in rapture shed,
  Which without consciousness the lids release.

    All steadily, one little sparkle red,
  Afar, drew close. A woman's form grew up
    Out of the dimness, tall, with queen-like head,
  And in one hand was fire; in one, a cup.
    Of aspect grave she was, with eyes upraised,
  As one whose thoughts perpetually did sup
    At the Lord's table.

                   While the cresset blazed,
  Her I regarded. "Daughter, whither bent,
    And wherefore?" As by speech of man amazed,
  One moment her deep look to me she lent;
    Then, in a voice of hymn-like, solemn fall,
  Calm, as by role, she spake out her intent:

    "I in my cruse bear water, wherewithal
  To quench the flames of Hell; and with my fire
    I Paradise would burn: that hence no small
  Fear shall impel, and no mean hope shall hire,
    Men to serve God as they have served of yore;
  But to his will shall set their whole desire,
    For love, love, love alone, forevermore!"

  And "love, love, love," rang round her as she passed
    From sight, with mystic murmurs o'er and o'er
  Reverbed from hollow heaven, as from some vast,
    Deep-colored, vaulted, ocean-answering shell.

  I, Ivo, had no power to ban or bless,
    But was as one withholden by a spell.
  Forward she fared in lofty loneliness,
  Urged on by an imperious inward stress,
    To waste fair Eden, and to drown fierce Hell.




  MADONNA PIA


  Ricordati di me, che son la Pia.
  Siena mi fe; disfecomi Maremma;
  Salsi colui, che, inanellata pria,
  Disposato m'avea colla sua gemma.

  _Purgatorio_, Canto V.


  To westward lies the unseen sea,
    Blue sea the live winds wander o'er.
  The many-colored sails can flee,
    And leave the dead, low-lying shore.
  Her longing does not seek the main,
    Her face turns northward first at morn;
  There, crowning all the wide champaign,
    Siena stood, where she was born.

  Siena stands, and still shall stand;
    She ne'er shall see or town or tower.
  Warm life and beauty, hand in hand,
    Steal farther from her hour by hour.
  Yet forth she leans, with trembling knees,
    And northward will she stare and stare
  Through that thick wall of cypress-trees,
    And sigh adown the stirless air:

  "Shall no remembrance in Siena linger
    Of me, once fair, whom slow Maremma slays?
  As well he knows, whose ring upon my finger
    Hath sealed for his alone mine earthly days!"

  From wilds where shudders through the weeds
    The dull, mean-headed, silent snake,
  Like voiceless doubt that creeps and breeds;
    From swamps where sluggish waters take,
  As lives unblest a passing love,
    The flag-flower's image in the spring,
  Or seem, when flits the bird above,
    To stir within with shadowed wing,

  A Presence mounts in pallid mist
    To fold her close: she breathes its breath;
  She waxes wan, by Fever kissed,
    Who weds her for his master, Death,
  Aside are set her dimmed hopes all,
    She counts no more the uncurrent hoard;
  On gray Death's neck she fain would fall,
    To own him for her proper lord.

  She minds the journey here by night:
    When some red sudden torch would blaze,
  She saw by fits, with childish fright,
    The cork-trees twist beside the ways.
  Like dancing demon shapes they showed,
    With malice drunk; the bat beat by,
  The owlet sobbed; on, on they rode,
    She knew not where, she knows not why.

  For Nello--when in piteous wise
    She lifted up her look to ask,
  Except the ever-burning eyes
    His face was like a marble mask.
  And so it always meets her now;
    The tomb wherein at last he lies
  Shall bear such carven lips and brow,
    All save the ever-burning eyes.

  Perchance it is his form alone
    Doth stroke his hound, at meat doth sit,
  And, for the soul that was his own,
    A fiend awhile inhabits it;
  While he sinks through the fiery throng,
    Down, to fill an evil bond,
  Since false conceit of others' wrong
    Hath wrought him to a sin beyond.

  But she--if when her years were glad
    Vain fluttering thoughts were hers, that hid
  Behind that gracious fame she had;
    If e'er observance hard she did
  That sinful men might call her saint,--
    White-handed Pia, dovelike-eyed,--
  The sick blank hours shall yet acquaint
    Her heart with all her blameful pride.

  And Death shall find her kneeling low,
    And lift her to the porphyry stair,
  And she from ledge to ledge shall go,
    Stayed by the staff of that last prayer,
  Until the high, sweet-singing wood
    Whence folk are rapt to heaven, she win;
  Therein the unpardoned never stood,
    Nor may one Sorrow nest therein.

  But through the Tuscan land shall beat
    Her Sorrow, like a wounded bird;
  And if her suit at Mary's feet
    Avail, its moan shall yet be heard
  By some just poet, who shall shed,
    Whate'er the theme that leads his rhyme
  Bright words like tears above her, dead,
    Entreating of the after time:

  "Among you let her mournful memory linger!
    Siena bare her, whom Maremma slew;
  And this dark lord, who gave her maiden finger
    His ancient gem, the secret only knew."




  TWO MOODS OF FAILURE

  I

  THE LAST CUP OF CANARY

  Sir Harry Lovelock, 1645


  So, the powder's low, and the larder's clean,
    And surrender drapes, with its black impending,
  All the stage for a sorry and sullen scene:
    Yet indulge me my whim of a madcap ending!

  Let us once more fill, ere the final chill,
    Every vein with the glow of the rich canary!
  Since the sweet hot liquor of life's to spill,
    Of the last of the cellar what boots be chary?

  Then hear the conclusion: I'll yield my breath,
    But my leal old house and my good blade never!
  Better one bitter kiss on the lips of Death
    Than despoiled Defeat as a wife forever!

  Let the faithful fire hold the walls in ward
    Till the roof-tree crash! Be the smoke once riven
  While we flash from the gate like a single sword,
    True steel to the hilt, though in dull earth driven!

  Do you frown, Sir Richard, above your ruff,
    In the Holbein yonder? My deed ensures you!
  For the flame like a fencer shall give rebuff
    To your blades that blunder, you Roundhead boors, you!

  And my ladies, a-row on the gallery wall,
    Not a sing-song sergeant or corporal sainted
  Shall pierce their breasts with his Puritan ball,
    To annul the charms of the flesh, though painted!

  I have worn like a jewel the life they gave;
    As the ring in mine ear I can lightly lose it,
  If my days be done, why, my days were brave!
    If the end arrive, I as master choose it!

  Then fill to the brim, and a health, I say,
    To our liege King Charles, and I pray God bless him!
  'T would amend worse vintage to drink dismay
    To the clamorous mongrel pack that press him!

  And a health to the fair women, past recall,
    That like birds astray through the heart's hall flitted;
  To the lean devil Failure last of all,
    And the lees in his beard for a fiend outwitted!


  II

  THE YOUNG MAN CHARLES STUART REVIEWETH THE TROOPS ON BLACKHEATH

  (Private Constant-in-Tribulation Joyce, _May_, 1660)


  We were still as a wood without wind; as 't were set by a spell
  Stayed the gleam on the steel cap, the glint on the slant petronel.
  He to left of me drew down his grim grizzled lip with his teeth,--
  I remember his look; so we grew like dumb trees on the heath.

  But the people,--the people were mad as with store of new wine;
  Oh, they cheered him, they capped him, they roared as he rode
        down the line:
  He that fled us at Worcester, the boy, the green brier-shoot, the son
  Of the Stuart on whom for his sin the great judgment was done!

  Swam before us the field of our shame, and our souls walked afar;
  Saw the glory, the blaze of the sun bursting over Dunbar;
  Saw the faces of friends, in the morn riding jocund to fight;
  Saw the stern pallid faces again, as we saw them at night!

  "O ye blessed, who died in the Lord! would to God that we too
  Had so passed, only sad that we ceased his high justice to do,
  With the words of the psalm on our lips that from Israel's once came,
  How the Lord is a strong man of war; yea, the Lord is his name!

  "Not for us, not for us! who have served for his kingdom seven years,
  Yea, and yet other seven have we served, sweating blood, bleeding
  tears,
  For the kingdom of God and the saints! Rachel's beauty made bold,
  Yet we bear but a Leah at last to a hearth that is cold!"

  Burned the fire while I mused, while I gloomed; in the end came a call;
  Settled o'er me a calm like a cloud, spake a voice still and small:
  "Take thou Leah to bride, take thou Failure to bed and to board!
  Thou shalt rear up new strengths at her knees; she is given
        of the Lord!

  "If with weight of his right hand, with power, he denieth to deal,
  And the smoke clouds, and thunders of guns, and the lightnings
        of steel,
  Shall the cool silent dews of his grace, in a season of peace,
  Not descend on the land, as of old, for a sign, on the fleece?

  "Hath he cleft not the rock, to the yield of a stream that is sweet?
  Hath he set in the ribs of the lion no honey for meat?
  Can he bring not delight to the desert, and buds to the rod?
  He will shine, he will visit his vine; he hath sworn, he is God!"

  Then I thought of the gate I rode through on the roan that's
        long dead,--
  I remember the dawn was but pale, and the stars overhead;
  Of the babe that is grown to a maid, and of Martha, my wife,
  And the spring on the wolds far away, and gave thanks for my life!




  THE STORY OF THE "ORIENT"


  'T was a pleasant Sunday morning while the spring was in its glory,
  English spring of gentle glory; smoking by his cottage door,
  Florid-faced, the man-o'-war's-man told his white-head boy the story,
  Noble story of Aboukir, told a hundred times before.

  "Here, the _Theseus_--here, the _Vanguard_;" as he spoke
        each name sonorous,--
  _Minotaur, Defence, Majestic_, stanch old comrades of the brine,
  That against the ships of Brucys made their broadsides roar
       in chorus,--
  Ranging daisies on his doorstone, deft he mapped the battle-line.

  Mapped the curve of tall three-deckers, deft as might
       a man left-handed,
  Who had given an arm to England later on at Trafalgar.
  While he poured the praise of Nelson to the child with eyes expanded,
  Bright athwart his honest forehead blushed the scarlet cutlass-scar.

  For he served aboard the _Vanguard_, saw the Admiral blind and bleeding
  Borne below by silent sailors, borne to die as then they deemed.
  Every stout heart sick but stubborn, fought the sea-dogs on unheeding,
  Guns were cleared and manned and cleared, the battle thundered,
        flashed, and screamed.

  Till a cry swelled loud and louder,--towered on fire the
        _Orient_ stately,
  Brucys' flag-ship, she that carried guns a hundred and a score;
  Then came groping up the hatchway he they counted dead but lately,
  Came the little one-armed Admiral to guide the fight once more.

  "'Lower the boats!' was Nelson's order."--
          But the listening boy beside him,
  Who had followed all his motions with an eager wide blue eye,
  Nursed upon the name of Nelson till he half had deified him,
  Here, with childhood's crude consistence, broke the tale
        to question "Why?"

  For by children facts go streaming in a throng that never pauses,
  Noted not, till, of a sudden, thought, a sunbeam, gilds the motes,
  All at once the known words quicken, and the child would deal
        with causes.
  Since to kill the French was righteous, why bade Nelson lower
        the boats?

  Quick the man put by the question. "But the _Orient_, none
        could save her;
  We could see the ships, the ensigns, clear as daylight by the flare;
  And a many leaped and left her; but, God rest 'em! some were braver;
  Some held by her, firing steady till she blew to God knows where."

  At the shock, he said, the _Vanguard_ shook through all
        her timbers oaken;
  It was like the shock of Doomsday,--not a tar but shuddered hard.
  All was hushed for one strange moment; then that awful calm was broken
  By the heavy plash that answered the descent of mast and yard.

  So, her cannon still defying, and her colors flaming, flying,
  In her pit her wounded helpless, on her deck her Admiral dead,
  Soared the _Orient_ into darkness with her living and her dying:
  "Yet our lads made shift to rescue three-score souls," the seaman said.

  Long the boy with knit brows wondered o'er that friending
        of the foeman;
  Long the man with shut lips pondered; powerless he to tell the cause
  Why the brother in his bosom that desired the death of no man,
  In the crash of battle wakened, snapped the bonds of hate like straws.

  While he mused, his toddling maiden drew the daisies to a posy;
  Mild the bells of Sunday morning rang across the church-yard sod;
  And, helped on by tender hands, with sturdy feet all bare and rosy,
  Climbed his babe to mother's breast, as climbs the slow world
        up to God.



  A RESURRECTION


  _Neither would they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead_.

  I was quick in the flesh, was warm, and the live heart shook my breast;
    In the market I bought and sold, in the temple I bowed my head.
  I had swathed me in shows and forms, and was honored above the rest
    For the sake of the life I lived; nor did any esteem me dead.

  But at last, when the hour was ripe--was it sudden-remembered word?
    Was it sight of a bird that mounted, or sound of a strain that
          stole?
  I was 'ware of a spell that snapped, of an inward strength that
        stirred,
    Of a Presence that filled that place; and it shone, and I knew
          my Soul.

  And the dream I had called my life was a garment about my feet,
    For the web of the years was rent with the throe of a
          yearning strong.
  With a sweep as of winds in heaven, with a rush as of flames that meet,
    The Flesh and the Spirit clasped; and I cried, "Was I dead so long?"

  I had glimpse of the Secret, flashed through the symbol obscure
        and mean,
    And I felt as a fire what erst I repeated with lips of clay;
  And I knew for the things eternal the things eye hath not seen;
    Yea, the heavens and the earth shall pass; but they never
          shall pass away.

  And the miracle on me wrought, in the streets I would straight
        make known:
    "When this marvel of mine is heard, without cavil shall men receive
  Any legend of haloed saint, staring up through the sealed stone!"
    So I spake in the trodden ways; but behold, there would none believe!




  THE GLORIOUS COMPANY


  "Faces, faces, faces of the streaming marching surge,
    Streaming on the weary road, toward the awful steep,
  Whence your glow and glory, as ye set to that sharp verge,
    Faces lit as sunlit stars, shining as ye sweep?

  "Whence this wondrous radiance that ye somehow catch and cast,
    Faces rapt, that one discerns 'mid the dusky press
  Herding in dull wonder, gathering fearful to the Vast?
    Surely all is dark before, night of nothingness!"

  _Lo, the Light!_ (they answer) _O the pure,
        the pulsing Light,
    Beating like a heart of life, like a heart of love,
  Soaring, searching, filling all the breadth and depth and height,
    Welling, whelming with its peace worlds below, above!_

  "O my soul, how art thou to that living Splendor blind,
    Sick with thy desire to see even as these men see!--
  Yet to look upon them is to know that God hath shined:
    Faces lit as sunlit stars, be all my light to me!"




  THE TRUMPETER


  Two ships, alone in sky and sea,
    Hang clinched, with crash and roar;
  There is but one--whiche'er it be--
    Will ever come to shore.

  And will it be the grim black bulk,
    That towers so evil now?
  Or will it be The Grace of God,
    With the angel at her prow?

  The man that breathes the battle's breath
    May live at last to know;
  But the trumpeter lies sick to death
    In the stifling dark below.

  He hears the fight above him rave;
    He fears his mates must yield;
  He lies as in a narrow grave
    Beneath a battle-field.

  His fate will fall before the ship's,
    Whate'er the ship betide;
  He lifts the trumpet to his lips
    As though he kissed a bride.

  "Now blow thy best, blow thy last,
    My trumpet, for the Right!"--
  He has sent his soul in one strong blast,
    To hearten them that fight.




  COMRADES


  "Oh, whither, whither, rider toward the west?"
    "And whither, whither, rider toward the east?"
  "I rode we ride upon the same high quest,
    Whereon who enters may not be released;

  "To seek the Cup whose form none ever saw,--
    A nobler form than e'er was shapen yet,
  Though million million cups without a flaw,
    Afire with gems, on princes' boards are set;

  "To seek the Wine whereof none ever had
    One draught, though many a generous wine flows free,--
  The spiritual blood that shall make glad
    The hearts of mighty men that are to be."

  "But shall one find it, brother? Where I ride,
    Men mock and stare, who never had the dream,
  Yet hope within my breast has never died."
    "Nor ever died in mine that trembling gleam."

  "Eastward, I deem: the sun and all good things
    Are born to bless us of the Orient old."
  "Westward, I deem: an untried ocean sings
    Against that coast, 'New shores await the bold.'"

  "God speed or thee or me, so coming men
    But have the Cup!" "God speed!"--Not once before
  Their eyes had met, nor ever met again,
    Yet were they loving comrades evermore.




  THE HOUSE OF HATE


  Mine enemy builded well, with the soft blue  hills in sight;
  But betwixt his house and the hills I builded a house for spite:
  And the name thereof I set in the stone-work over the gate,
  With a carving of bats and apes; and I called it the House of Hate.

  And the front was alive with masks of malice and of despair;
  Horned demons that leered in stone, and women with serpent hair;
  That whenever his glance would rest on the soft hills far and blue,
  It must fall on mine evil work, and my hatred should pierce
        him through.

  And I said, "I will dwell herein, for beholding my heart's desire
  On my foe;" and I knelt, and fain had brightened the hearth with fire;
  But the brands they would hiss and die, as with curses a strangled man,
  And the hearth was cold from the day that the House of Hate began.

  And I called at the open door, "Make ye merry, all friends of mine,
  In the hall of my House of Hate, where is plentiful store and wine.
  We will drink unhealth together unto him I have foiled and fooled!"
  And they stared and they passed me by; but I scorned to be thereby
        schooled.

  And I ordered my board for feast; and I drank, in the topmost seat,
  Choice grape from a curious cup; and the first it was wonder-sweet;
  But the second was bitter indeed, and the third was bitter and black,
  And the gloom of the grave came on me, and I cast the cup to wrack.

  Alone, I was stark alone, and the shadows were each a fear;
  And thinly I laughed, but once, for the echoes were strange to hear;
  And the wind in the hallways howled as a green-eyed wolf might cry,
  And I heard my heart: I must look on the face of a man, or die!

  So I crept to my mirrored face, and I looked, and I saw it grown
  (By the light in my shaking hand) to the like of the masks of stone;
  And with horror I shrieked aloud as I flung my torch and fled,
  And a fire-snake writhed where it fell; and at midnight
        the sky was red.

  And at morn, when the House of Hate was a ruin, despoiled of flame,
  I fell at mine enemy's feet, and besought him to slay my shame;
  But he looked in mine eyes and smiled, and his eyes were
        calm and great:
  "You rave, or have dreamed," he said; "I saw not your House of Hate."




  THE ARROWMAKER


  Day in, day out, or sun or rain,
  Or sallow leaf, or summer grain,
  Beneath a wintry morning moon
  Or through red smouldering afternoon,
  With simple joy, with careful pride,
  He plies the craft he long has plied:
  To shape the stave, to set the sting,
  To fit the shaft with irised wing;
  And farers by may hear him sing,
    For still his door is wide:
    "Laugh and sigh, live and die,--
    The world swings round; I know not, I,
    If north or south mine arrows fly!"

  And sometimes, while he works, he dreams,
  And on his soul a vision gleams:
  Some storied field fought long ago,
  Where arrows fell as thick as snow.
  His breath comes fast, his eyes grow bright,
  To think upon that ancient fight.
  Oh, leaping from the strained string
  Against an armored Wrong to ring,
  Brave the songs that arrows sing!
    He weighs the finished flight:
    "Live and die; by and by
    The sun kills dark; I know not, I,
    In what good fight mine arrows fly!"

  Or at the gray hour, weary grown,
  When curfew o'er the wold is blown,
  He sees, as in a magic glass,
  Some lost and lonely mountain-pass;
  And lo! a sign of deathful rout
  The mocking vine has wound about,--
  An earth-fixed arrow by a spring,
  All greenly mossed, a mouldered thing;
  That stifled shaft no more shall sing!
    He shakes his head in doubt.
    "Laugh and sigh, live and die,--
    The hand is blind: I know not, I,
    In what lost pass mine arrows lie!
    One to east, one to west,
    Another for the eagle's breast,--
    The archer and the wind know best!"
    The stars are in the sky;
    He lays his arrows by.




  A NEST IN A LYRE


  As sign before a playhouse serves
    A giant Lyre, ornately gilded,
  On whose convenient coignes and curves
    The pert brown sparrows late have builded.
  They flit, and flirt, and prune their wings,
    Not awed at all by golden glitter,
  And make among the silent strings
    Their satisfied ephemeral twitter.

  Ah, somewhat so we perch and flit,
    And spy some crumb and dash to win it,
  And with a witty chirping twit
    Our sheltering Time--there's nothing in it!
  In Life's large frame, a glorious Lyre's,
    We nest, content, our season flighty,
  Nor guess we brush the powerful wires
    Might witch the stars with music mighty.




  THISBE


  The garden within was shaded,
    And guarded about from sight;
  The fragrance flowed to the south wind,
    The fountain leaped to the light.

  And the street without was narrow,
    And dusty, and hot, and mean;
  But the bush that bore white roses,
    She leaned to the fence between:

  And softly she sought a crevice
    In that barrier blank and tall,
  And shyly she thrust out through it
    Her loveliest bud of all.

  And tender to touch, and gracious,
    And pure as the moon's pure shine,
  The full rose paled and was perfect,--
    For whose eyes, for whose lips, but mine!




  THE SPRING BEAUTIES


  The Puritan Spring Beauties stood freshly clad for church;
  A Thrush, white-breasted, o'er them sat singing on his perch.
  "Happy be! for fair are ye!" the gentle singer told them,
  But presently a buff-coat Bee came booming up to scold them.
    "Vanity, oh, vanity!
    Young maids, beware of vanity!"
    Grumbled out the buff-coat Bee,
    Half parson-like, half soldierly.

  The sweet-faced maidens trembled, with pretty, pinky blushes,
  Convinced that it was wicked to listen to the Thrushes;
  And when, that shady afternoon, I chanced that way to pass,
  They hung their little bonnets down and looked into the grass,
    All because the buff-coat Bee
    Lectured them so solemnly:--
    "Vanity, oh, vanity!
    Young maids, beware of vanity!"




  KINSHIP


  A lily grew in the tangle,
    In a flame red garment dressed,
  And many a ruby spangle
    Besprinkled her tawny breast.

  And the silken moth sailed by her
    With a swift and a snow-white sail;
  Not a gilt-girt bee came nigh her,
    Nor a fly in his gay green mail.

  And the bronze-brown wings and the golden,
    O'er the billowing meadows blown,
  Were still as by magic holden
    From the lily that flamed alone;

  Till over the fragrant tangle
    A wanderer winging went,
  And with many a ruby spangle
    Were his tawny vans besprent.
  And he hovered one moment stilly
    O'er the thicket, her mazy bower,
  Then he sank to the heart of the lily,
    And they seemed but a single flower.




  COMPENSATION


  The brook ran laughing from the shade,
    And in the sunshine danced all day:
  The starlight and the moonlight made
    Its glimmering path a Milky Way.

  The blue sky burned, with summer fired;
    For parching fields, for pining flowers,
  The spirits of the air desired
    The brook's bright life to shed in showers.

  It gave its all that thirst to slake;
    Its dusty channel lifeless lay;
  Now softest flowers, white-foaming, make
    Its winding bed a Milky Way.




  WHEN WILLOWS GREEN


  When goldenly the willows green,
    And, mirrored in the sunset pool,
  Hang wavering, wild-rose clouds between:
    When robins call in twilights cool:
        What is it we await?
        Who lingers and is late?
  What strange unrest, what yearning stirs us all
  When willows green, when robins call?

  When fields of flowering grass respire
    A sweet that seems the breath of Peace,
  And liquid-voiced the thrushes choir,
    Oh, whence the sense of glad release?
        What is it life uplifts?
        Who entered, bearing gifts?
  What floods from heaven the being overpower
  When thrushes choir, when grasses flower?




  AT THE PARTING OF THE WAYS

  (AD COMITEM JUNIOREM)


  Comrade Youth! Sit down with me
  Underneath the summer tree,
  Cool green dome whose shade is sweet,
  Where the sunny roadways meet,
  See, the ancient finger-post,
  Silver-bleached with rain and shine,
  Warns us like a noon-day ghost:
  That way's yours, and this way's mine!
  I would hold you with delays
  Here at parting of the ways.

  Hold you! I as well might look
  To detain the racing brook
  With regrets and grievance tender,
  As my comrade swift and slender,
  Shy, capricious, all of spring!
  Catch the wind with blossoms laden,
  Catch the wild bird on the wing,
  Catch the heart of boy or maiden!

  Yet I'll hold your image fast,
  As this hour I saw you last,--
  As with staff in hand you sat,
  Soft curls putting forth defiant
  From the tilted Mercury's hat,
  Wreathen with the wilding grace
  Of the fresh-leaved vine and pliant,
  Stealing down to see your face.
  Eyes of pleasance, lips of laughter,
  I shall hoard you long hereafter;
  Very dear shall be the days
  Ere the parting of the ways!

  Shall you deem them dear, in truth,
  Days when we, o'er hill and hollow,
  Trudged together, Comrade Youth?
  Ah, you dream of days to follow!
  Hand in hand we jogged along;
  I would fetch from out my scrip,
  Crust or jest or antique song,--
  Live and lovely, on your lip,
  Such poor needments as I had
  Were as yours; you made me glad.
  --Lo, the dial! No prayer stays
  Time, at parting of the ways!

  This gold memory--rings it true?
  Half for me and half for you.
  Cleave and share it. Now, good sooth,
  God be with you, Comrade Youth!




  THE FAIR GRAY LADY


  When the charm at last is fled
    From the woodland stark and pale,
  And like shades of glad hours dead
    Whirl the leaves before the gale:

  When against the western fire
    Darkens many an empty nest,
  Like a thwarted heart's desire
    That in prime was hardly guessed:

  Then the fair gray Lady leans,
    Lingering, o'er the faded grass,
  Still the soul of all the scenes
    Once she graced, a golden lass.

  O'er the Year's discrowned sleep,
    Dear as in her earlier day,
  She her bending watch doth keep,
    She the Goldenrod grown gray.




  THE ENCOUNTER


  There's a wood-way winding high,
  Roofed far up with light-green flicker,
  Save one midmost star of sky.
  Underfoot 'tis all pale brown
  With the dead leaves matted down
  One on other, thick and thicker;
  Soft, but springing to the tread.
  There a youth late met a maid
  Running lightly,--oh, so fleetly!
  "Whence art thou?" the herd-boy said.
  Either side her long hair swayed,
  Half a tress and half a braid,
  Colored like the soft dead leaf,
  As she answered, laughing sweetly,
  On she ran, as flies the swallow;
  He could not choose but follow
  Though it had been to his grief.

  "I have come up from the valley,--
  From the valley!" Once he caught her,
  Swerving down a sidelong alley,
  For a moment, by the hand.
  "Tell me, tell me," he besought her,
  "Sweetest, I would understand
  Why so cold thy palm, that slips
  From me like the shy cold minnow?
  The wood is warm, and smells of fern,
  And below the meadows burn.
  Hard to catch and hard to win, oh!
  Why are those brown finger tips
  Crinkled as with lines of water?"

  Laughing while she featly footed,
  With the herd-boy hasting after,
  Sprang she on a trunk uprooted,
  Clung she by a roping vine;
  Leaped behind a birch, and told,
  Still eluding, through its fine,
  Mocking, slender, leafy laughter,
  Why her finger tips were cold:

  "I went down to tease the brook,
  With her fishes, there below;
  She comes dancing, thou must know,
  And the bushes arch above her;
  But the seeking sunbeams look,
  Dodging through the wind-blown cover,
  Find and kiss her into stars.
  Silvery veins entwine and crook
  Where a stone her tripping bars;
  There be smooth, clear sweeps, and swirls
  Bubbling up crisp drops like pearls.
  There I lie, along the rocks
  Thick with greenest slippery moss,
  And I have in hand a strip
  Of gray, pliant, dappled bark;
  And I comb her liquid locks
  Till her tangling currents cross;
  And I have delight to hark
  To the chiding of her lip,
  Taking on the talking stone
  With each turn another tone.
  Oh, to set her wavelets bickering!
  Oh, to hear her laughter simple,
  See her fret and flash and dimple!
  Ha, ha, ha!" The woodland rang
  With the rippling through the flickering.
  At the birch the herd-boy sprang.

  On a sudden something wound
  Vine-like round his throbbing throat;
  On a sudden something smote
  Sharply on his longing lips,
  Stung him as the birch bough whips:
  Was it kiss or was it blow?
  Never after could he know;
  She was gone without a sound.

  Never after could he see
  In the wood or in the mead,
  Or in any company
  Of the rustic mortal maids,
  Her with acorn-colored braids;
  Never came she to his need.
  Never more the lad was merry,
  Strayed apart, and learned to dream,
  Feeding on the tart wild berry;
  Murmuring words none understood,--
  Words with music of the wood,
  And with music of the stream.




  SUMMER HOURS


  Hours aimless-drifting as the milkweed's down
    In seeming, still a seed of joy ye bear
    That steals into the soul when unaware,
  And springs up Memory in the stony town.




  LOVE UNSUNG


  Seven jewelled rays has the Sun fast bound
      In his arrow of blinding sheen;
  But he quickens the breast of the fruitful ground
      With a subtlest ray unseen.

  And the rainbow moods of this love of ours
      I may blend in the song I bring;
  But the magic that makes life laugh with flowers
      Is the love that I cannot sing.




  THE WISH FOR A CHAPLET


  Vineleaf and rose I would my chaplet make:
  I would my word were wine for all men's sake.
  Pure from the pressing of the stainless feet
  Of unblamed Hours, and for an altar meet.

  Vineleaf and rose: I would, had I the art,
  Distil, to lasting sweet, Joy's rosy heart,
  That no sere autumn should its fragrance wrong,
  Closed in the crystal glass of slender song.




  SONNETS




  THE TORCH-RACE


  Brave racer, who hast sped the living light
  With throat outstretched and every nerve a-strain,
  Now on thy left hand labors gray-faced Pain,
  And Death hangs close behind thee on the right.
  Soon flag the flying feet, soon fails the sight,
  With every pulse the gaunt pursuers gain;
  And all thy splendor of strong life must wane
  And set into the mystery of night.

  Yet fear not, though in falling, blindness hide
  Whose hand shall snatch, before it scars the sod,
  The light thy lessening grasp no more controls:
  Truth's rescuer, Truth shall instantly provide:
  This is the torch-race game, that noblest souls
  Play on through time beneath the eyes of God.




  TO SLEEP


  All slumb'rous images that be, combined,
  To this white couch and cool shall woo thee, Sleep!
  First will I think on fields of grasses deep
  In gray-green flower, o'er which the transient wind
  Runs like a smile; and next will call to mind
  How glistening poplar-tops, when breezes creep
  Among their leaves, a tender motion keep,
  Stroking the sky, like touch of lovers kind.

  Ah, having felt thy calm kiss on mine eyes,
  All night inspiring thy divine pure breath,
  I shall awake as into godhood born,
  And with a fresh, undaunted soul arise,
  Clear as the blue convolvulus at morn.
  --Dear bedfellow, deals thus thy brother, Death?




  SISTER SNOW


  Praised be our Lord (to echo the sweet phrase
  Of saintly Francis) for our sister Snow:
  Whose soft, soft coming never man may know
  By any sound; whose down-light touch allays
  All fevers of worn earth. She clothes the days
  In garments without spot, and hence doth go
  Her noiseless shuttle swiftly to and fro,
  And very pure, and pleasant, are her ways.

  But yesterday, how loveless looked the skies!
  How cold the sun's last glance, and unbenign,
  Across the field forsaken, russet-leaved!
  Now pearly peace on all the landscape lies.
  --Wast thou not sent us, Sister, for a sign
  Of that vast Mercy of God, else unconceived?




  RETROSPECT


  "Backward," he said, "dear heart I like to look
  To those half-spring, half-winter days, when first
  We drew together, ere the leaf-buds burst.
  Sunbeams were silver yet, keen gusts yet shook
  The boughs. Have you remembered that kind book,
  That for our sake Galeotto's part rehearsed,
  (The friend of lovers,--this time blessed, not cursed!)
  And that best hour, when reading we forsook?"

  She, listening, wore the smile a mother wears
  At childish fancies needless to control;
  Yet felt a fine, hid pain with pleasure blend.
  Better it seemed to think that love of theirs,
  Native as breath, eternal as the soul,
  Knew no beginning, could not have an end.




  THE CONTRAST


  He loved her; having felt his love begin
  With that first look,--as lover oft avers.
  He made pale flowers his pleading ministers,
  Impressed sweet music, drew the springtime in
  To serve his suit; but when he could not win,
  Forgot her face and those gray eyes of hers;
  And at her name his pulse no longer stirs,
  And life goes on as though she had not been.

  She never loved him; but she loved Love so,
  So reverenced Love, that all her being shook
  At his demand whose entrance she denied.
  Her thoughts of him such tender color took
  As western skies that keep the afterglow.
  The words he spoke were with her till she died.




  A MYSTERY


  That sunless day no living shadow swept
  Across the hills, fleet shadow chasing light,
  Twin of the sailing cloud: but, mists wool white,
  Slow-stealing mists, on those heaved shoulders crept,
  And wrought about the strong hills while they slept
  In witches' wise, and rapt their forms from sight.
  Dreams were they; less than dream, the noblest height
  And farthest; and the chilly woodland wept.

  A sunless day and sad: yet all the while
  Within the grave green twilight of the wood,
  inscrutable, immutable, apart,
  Hearkening the brook, whose song she understood,
  The secret birch-tree kept her silver smile,
  Strange as the peace that gleams at sorrow's heart.




  TRIUMPH


  This windy sunlit morning after rain,
  The wet bright laurel laughs with beckoning gleam
  In the blown wood, whence breaks the wild white stream
  Rushing and flashing, glorying in its gain;
  Nor swerves nor parts, but with a swift disdain
  O'erleaps the boulders lying in long dream,
  Lapped in cold moss; and in its joy doth seem
  A wood-born creature bursting from a chain.

  And "Triumph, triumph, triumph!" is its hoarse
  Fierce-whispered word. O fond, and dost not know
  Thy triumph on another wise must be,--
  To render all the tribute of thy force,
  And lose thy little being in the flow
  Of the unvaunting river toward the sea!




  IN WINTER, WITH THE BOOK WE READ IN SPRING


  The blackberry's bloom, when last we went this way,
  Veiled all her bowsome rods with trembling white;
  The robin's sunset breast gave forth delight
  At sunset hour; the wind was warm with May.
  Armored in ice the sere stems arch to-day,
  Each tiny thorn encased and argent bright;
  Where clung the birds that long have taken flight,
  Dead songless leaves cling fluttering on the spray.

  O hand in mine, that mak'st all paths the same,
  Being paths of peace, where falls nor chill nor gloom,
  Made sweet with ardors of an inward spring!
  I hold thee--frozen skies to rosy flame
  Are turned, and snows to living snows of bloom,
  And once again the gold-brown thrushes sing.




  SERE WISDOM


  I had remembrance of a summer morn,
  When all the glistening field was softly stirred
  And like a child's in happy sleep I heard
  The low and healthful breathing of the corn.
  Late when the sumach's red was dulled and worn,
  And fainter grew the trite and troublous word
  Of tristful cricket, that replaced the bird,
  I sought the slope, and found a waste forlorn.

  Against that cold clear west, whence winter peers,
  All spectral stood the bleached stalks thin-leaved,
  Dry as papyrus kept a thousand years,
  And hissing whispered to the wind that grieved,
  _It was a dream--we have no goodly ears--
  There was no summer-time--deceived! deceived!_




  ISOLATION


  White fog around, soft snow beneath the tread,
  All sunless, windless, tranced, the morning lay;
  All noiseless, trackless, new, the well-known way.
  The silence weighed upon the sense; in dread,
  "Alone, I am alone," I shuddering said,
  "And wander in a region where no ray
  Has ever shone, and as on earth's first day
  Or last, my kind are not yet born or dead."

  Yet not afar, meanwhile, there faltered feet
  Like mine, through that wide mystery of the snow,
  Nor could the old accustomed paths divine;
  And even as mine, unheard spake voices low,
  And hearts were near, that as my own heart beat,
  Warm hands, and faces fashioned like to mine.




  THE LOST DRYAD

  (TO EDITH M. THOMAS)


  Into what beech or silvern birch, O friend
  Suspected ever of a dryad strain,
  Hast crept at last, delighting to regain
  Thy sylvan house? Now whither shall I wend,
  Or by what winged post my greeting send,
  Bird, butterfly, or bee? Shall three moons wane,
  And yet not found?--Ah, surely it was pain
  Of old, for mortal youth his heart to lend
  To any hamadryad! In his hour
  Of simple trust, wild impulse him bereaves:
  She flees, she seeks her strait enmossed bower
  And while he, searching, softly calls, and grieves,
  Oblivious, high above she laughs in leaves,
  Or patters tripping talk to the quick shower.




  A MEMORY


  Though pent in stony streets, 'tis joy to know,
  'Tis joy, although we breathe a fainter air,
  The spirit of those places far and fair
  That we have loved, abides; and fern-scents flow
  Out of the wood's heart still, and shadows grow
  Long on remembered roads as warm days wear;
  And still the dark wild water, in its lair,
  The narrow chasm, stirs blindly to and fro.

  Delight is in the sea-gull's dancing wings,
  And sunshine wakes to rose the ruddy hue
  Of rocks; and from her tall wind-slanted stem
  A soft bright plume the goldenrod outflings
  Along the breeze, above a sea whose blue
  Is like the light that kindles through a gem.




  THE GIFTS OF THE OAK

  (FOR THE SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY OF JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL)


  'There needs no crown to mark the forest's king.'
  Thus, long ago thou sang'st the sound-heart tree
  Sacred to sovereign Jove, and dear to thee
  Since first, a venturous youth with eyes of spring,--
  Whose pilgrim-staff each side put forth a wing,--
  Beneath the oak thou lingeredst lovingly
  To crave, as largess of his majesty,
  Firm-rooted strength, and grace of leaves that sing.

  He gave; we thank him! Graciousness as grave,
  And power as easeful as his own he gave;
  Long broodings rich with sun, and laughters kind;
  And singing leaves, whose later bronze is dear
  As the first amber of the budding year,--
  Whose voices answer the autumnnal wind.




  THE STRAYED SINGER

  (MATTHEW ARNOLD)


  He wandered from us long, oh, long ago,
  Rare singer, with the note unsatisfied;
  Into what charmed wood, what shade star-eyed
  With the wind's April darlings, none may know.
  We lost him. Songless, one with seed to sow,
  Keen-smiling toiler, came in place, and plied
  His strength in furrowed field till eventide,
  And passed to slumber when the sun was low.

  But now,--as though Death spoke some mystic word
  Solving a spell,--present to thought appears
  The morn's estray, not him we saw but late;
  And on his lips the strain that once we heard,
  And in his hand, cool as with Springtime's tears,
  The melancholy wood-flowers delicate.




  THE IMMORTAL WORD


  One soiled and shamed and foiled in this world's fight,
  Deserter from the host of God, that here
  Still darkly struggles,--waked from death in fear,
  And strove to screen his forehead from the white
  And blinding glory of the awful Light,
  The revelation and reproach austere.
  Then with strong hand outstretched a Shape drew near,
  Bright-browed, majestic, armored like a knight.

  "Great Angel, servant of the Highest, why
  Stoop'st thou to me?" although his lips were mute,
  His eyes inquired. The Shining One replied:
  "Thy Book, thy birth, life of thy life am I,
  Son of thy soul, thy youth's forgotten fruit.
  We two go up to judgment side by side."










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ride to the Lady, by Helen Gray Cone

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIDE TO THE LADY ***

***** This file should be named 9559.txt or 9559.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/5/5/9559/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Josephine Paolucci, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
