The Project Gutenberg EBook of Beowulf, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Beowulf

Author: Unknown

Editor: James A. Harrison
        Robert Sharp

Release Date: November 22, 2011 [EBook #9700]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEOWULF ***




Produced by Karl Hagen and PG Distributed Proofreaders










** Preface to the Project Gutenberg Edition of Beowulf **

This text is a corrected version of the fourth edition of Harrison and
Sharp in its entirety. It comes in two basic versions. The base version,
available in 8-bit (Latin-1) text and HTML, presents the original text as
printed. This file contains the original version. It preserves the
source-text's idiosyncratic use of accented vowels with the exception of
y-circumflex, which is replaced by y-acute (y) to fit within the Latin-1
character set. Manifestly unintentional errors in the text have been
corrected. In general, this has only been done when the text is internally
inconsistent (e.g., a quotation in the glossary does not match the main
text). Forms that represent deliberate editorial choice have not been
altered, even where they appear wrong. (For example, some of the markings
of vowel length do not reflect current scholarly consensus.) Where an
uncorrected problem may confuse the reader, I have inserted a note
explaining the difficulty, signed KTH. A complete list of the changes made
is appended at the end of the file. In order to make the text more useful
to modern readers, I have also produced a revised edition, available in
Unicode (UTF-8) and HTML. Notes from the source text that indicate changes
adopted in later editions have been incorporated directly into the text and
apparatus. Further, long vowels are indicated with macrons, as is the
common practice of most modern editions. Finally, the quantity of some
words has been altered to the values currently accepted as correct.
Quantities have not been changed when the difference is a matter of
editorial interpretation (e.g., gaest vs. gaest in l. 102, etc.) A list of
these altered quantities appears at the end of the list of corrections.
Your browser must support the Unicode character set to use the revised
version.

Explanation of the Vowel Accenting

In general, Harrison and Sharp use circumflex accents over vowels to mark
long vowels. For ash, however, the actual character 'ae' represents the long
vowel. Short ash is rendered with a-umlaut (ae). The long diphthongs (eo,
ea, etc.) are indicated with an acute accent over the _second_ vowel (eo,
ea, etc.).

** End of PG Preface **


I. BEOWULF:

_AN ANGLO-SAXON POEM_.

II. THE FIGHT AT FINNSBURH:

_A FRAGMENT_.

WITH TEXT AND GLOSSARY ON THE BASIS OF M. HEYNE.

EDITED, CORRECTED, AND ENLARGED, BY

JAMES A. HARRISON, LL.D., LITT. D.,

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH AND MODERN LANGUAGES, WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVERSITY,

AND

ROBERT SHARP (PH.D. LIPS.),

PROFESSOR OF GREEK AND ENGLISH, TULANE UNIVERSITY OF LOUISIANA.

FOURTH EDITION. REVISED, WITH NOTES.

GINN & COMPANY

BOSTON--NEW YORK--CHICAGO--LONDON

Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1883, by

JAMES ALBERT HARRISON AND ROBERT SHARP

in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.



DEDICATED

TO

PROFESSOR F. A. MARCH, OF LAFAYETTE COLLEGE, PA.,

AND

FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL, ESQ. FOUNDER OF THE "NEW SHAKSPERE SOCIETY," THE
"CHAUCER SOCIETY," ETC., ETC.



PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.

The favor with which the successive editions of "Beowulf" have been
received during the past thirteen years emboldens the editors to continue
the work of revision in a fourth issue, the most noticeable feature of
which is a considerable body of explanatory Notes, now for the first time
added. These Notes mainly concern themselves with new textual readings,
with here and there grammatical, geographical, and archaeological points
that seemed worthy of explanation. Parallelisms and parallel passages are
constantly compared, with the view of making the poem illustrate and
explain itself. A few emendations and textual changes are suggested by the
editors with all possible diffidence; numerous corrections have been made
in the Glossary and List of Names; and the valuable parts of former
Appendices have been embodied in the Notes.

For the Notes, the editors are much indebted to the various German
periodicals mentioned on page 116, to the recent publications of Professors
Earle and J. L. Hall, to Mr. S. A. Brooke, and to the Heyne-Socin edition
of "Beowulf." No change has been made in the system of accentuation, though
a few errors in quantity have been corrected. The editors are looking
forward to an eventual fifth edition, in which an entirely new text will be
presented.

October, 1893.



NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

This third edition of the American issue of Beowulf will, the editors hope,
be found more accurate and useful than either of the preceding editions.
Further corrections in text and glossary have been made, and some
additional new readings and suggestions will be found in two brief
appendices at the back of the book. Students of the metrical system of
Beowulf will find ample material for their studies in Sievers' exhaustive
essay on that subject (Beitraege, X. 209-314).

Socin's edition of Heyne's Beowulf (called the fifth edition) has been
utilized to some extent in this edition, though it unfortunately came too
late to be freely used. While it repeats many of the omissions and
inaccuracies of Heyne's fourth edition, it contains much that is valuable
to the student, particularly in the notes and commentary. Students of the
poem, which has been subjected to much searching criticism during the last
decade, will also derive especial help from the contributions of Sievers
and Kluge on difficult questions appertaining to it. Wuelker's new edition
(in the Grein _Bibliothek_) is of the highest value, however one may
dissent from particular textual views laid down in the 'Berichtigter Text.'
Paul and Braune's Beitraege contain a varied miscellany of hints,
corrections, and suggestions principally embodying the views of Kluge,
Cosijn, Sievers, and Bugge, some of the more important of which are found
in the appendices to the present and the preceding edition. Holder and
Zupitza, Sarrazin and Hermann Moeller (Kiel, 1883), Heinzel (Anzeiger f.d.
Alterthum, X.), Gering (Zacher's Zeitschrift, XII.), Brenner (Eng. Studien,
IX.), and the contributors to Anglia, have assisted materially in the
textual and metrical interpretation of the poem.

The subject of Anglo-Saxon quantity has been discussed in several able
essays by Sievers, Sweet, Ten Brink (Anzeiger, f.d. Alterthum, V.), Kluge
(Beitraege, XI.), and others; but so much is uncertain in this field that
the editors have left undisturbed the marking of vowels found in the text
of their original edition, while indicating in the appendices the now
accepted views of scholars on the quantity of the personal pronouns (me,
we, þu, þe, ge, he); the adverb nu, etc. Perhaps it would be best to banish
absolutely all attempts at marking quantities except in cases where the Ms.
has them marked.

An approximately complete Bibliography of Beowulf literature will be found
in Wuelker's _Grundriss_ and in Garnett's translation of the poem.

JAMES A. HARRISON,

ROBERT SHARP.

WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVERSITY,
LEXINGTON, VA., May, 1888.


NOTE TO THE SECOND REVISED EDITION.

The editors feel so encouraged at the kind reception accorded their edition
of Beowulf (1883), that, in spite of its many shortcomings, they have
determined to prepare a second revised edition of the book, and thus
endeavor to extend its sphere of usefulness. About twenty errors had,
notwithstanding a vigilant proof-reading, crept into the text,--errors in
single letters, accents, and punctuation. These have been corrected, and it
is hoped that the text has been rendered generally accurate and
trustworthy. In the List of Names one or two corrections have been made,
and in the Glossary numerous mistakes in gender, classification, and
translation, apparently unavoidable in a first edition, have been
rectified. Wherever these mistakes concern _single_ letters, or occupy very
small space, they have been corrected in the plates; where they are longer,
and the expense of correcting them in the plates would have been very
great, the editors have thought it best to include them in an Appendix of
Corrections and Additions, which will be found at the back of the book.
Students are accordingly referred to this Appendix for important longer
corrections and additions. It is believed that the value of the book has
been much enhanced by an Appendix of Recent Readings, based on late
criticisms and essays from the pens of Sievers, Kluge, Cosijn, Holder,
Wuelker, and Sweet. A perplexed student, in turning to these suggested
readings, will often find great help in unravelling obscure or corrupt
passages.

The objectionable ae and ae, for the short and the long diphthong, have been
retained in the revised edition, owing to the impossibility of removing
them without entirely recasting the plates.

In conclusion, the editors would acknowledge their great indebtedness to
the friends and critics whose remarks and criticisms have materially aided
in the correction of the text,--particularly to Profs. C.P.G. Scott,
Baskervill, Price, and J.M. Hart; to Prof. J.W. Bright; and to the
authorities of Cornell University, for the loan of periodicals necessary to
the completeness of the revision. While the second revised edition still
contains much that might be improved, the editors cannot but hope that it
is an advance on its predecessor, and that it will continue its work of
extending the study of Old English throughout the land.

JUNE, 1885.


NOTE I.

The present work, carefully edited from Heyne's fourth edition, (Paderborn,
1879), is designed primarily for college classes in Anglo-Saxon, rather
than for independent investigators or for seekers after a restored or ideal
text. The need of an American edition of "Beowulf" has long been felt, as,
hitherto, students have had either to send to Germany for a text, or
secure, with great trouble, one of the scarce and expensive English
editions. Heyne's first edition came out in 1863, and was followed in 1867
and 1873 by a second and a third edition, all three having essentially the
same text.

So many important contributions to the "Beowulf" literature were, however,
made between 1873 and 1879 that Heyne found it necessary to put forth a new
edition (1879). In this new, last edition, the text was subjected to a
careful revision, and was fortified by the views, contributions, and
criticisms of other zealous scholars. In it the collation of the unique
"Beowulf" Ms. (Vitellius A. 15: Cottonian Mss. of the British Museum), as
made by E. Koelbing in Herrig's _Archiv_ (Bd. 56; 1876), was followed
wherever the present condition of the Ms. had to be discussed; and the
researches of Bugge, Bieger, and others, on single passages, were made use
of. The discussion of the metrical structure of the poem, as occurring in
the second and third editions, was omitted in the fourth, owing to the many
controversies in which the subject is still involved. The present editor
has thought it best to do the same, though, happily, the subject of Old
English _Metrik_ is undergoing a steady illumination through the labors of
Schipper and others.

Some errors and misplaced accents in Heyne's text have been corrected in
the present edition, in which, as in the general revision of the text, the
editor has been most kindly aided by Prof. J.M. Garnett, late Principal of
St. John's College, Maryland.

In the preparation of the present school edition it has been thought best
to omit Heyne's notes, as they concern themselves principally with
conjectural emendations, substitutions of one reading for another, and
discussions of the condition of the Ms. Until Wuelker's text and the
photographic fac-simile of the original Ms. are in the hands of all
scholars, it will be better not to introduce such matters in the school
room, where they would puzzle without instructing.

For convenience of reference, the editor has added a head-line to each
"fit" of the poem, with a view to facilitate a knowledge of its episodes.

WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVERSITY,
LEXINGTON, VA., June, 1882.


NOTE II.

The editors now have the pleasure of presenting to the public a complete
text and a tolerably complete glossary of "Beowulf." The edition is the
first published in America, and the first of its special kind presented to
the English public, and it is the initial volume of a "Library of
Anglo-Saxon Poetry," to be edited under the same auspices and with the
cooeperation of distinguished scholars in this country. Among these scholars
may be mentioned Professors F.A. March of Lafayette College, T.K. Price of
Columbia College, and W.M. Baskervill of Vanderbilt University.

In the preparation of the Glossary the editors found it necessary to
abandon a literal and exact translation of Heyne for several reasons, and
among others from the fact that Heyne seems to be wrong in the translation
of some of his illustrative quotations, and even translates the same
passage in two or three different ways under different headings. The
orthography of his glossary differs considerably from the orthography of
his text. He fails to discriminate with due nicety the meanings of many of
the words in his vocabulary, while criticism more recent than his latest
edition (1879) has illustrated or overthrown several of his renderings. The
references were found to be incorrect in innumerable instances, and had to
be verified in every individual case so far as this was possible, a few
only, which resisted all efforts at verification, having to be indicated by
an interrogation point (?). The references are exceedingly numerous, and
the labor of verifying them was naturally great. To many passages in the
Glossary, where Heyne's translation could not be trusted with entire
certainty, the editors have added other translations of phrases and
sentences or of special words; and in this they have been aided by a
careful study of the text and a comparison and utilization of the views of
Kemble and Professor J.M. Garnett (who takes Grein for his foundation).
Many new references have been added; and the various passages in which
Heyne fails to indicate whether a given verb is weak or strong, or fails to
point out the number, etc., of the illustrative form, have been corrected
and made to harmonize with the general plan of the work. Numerous misprints
in the glossary have also been corrected, and a brief glossary to the
Finnsburh-fragment, prepared by Dr. Wm. Hand Browne, and supplemented and
adapted by the editor-in-chief, has been added.

The editors think that they may without immodesty put forth for themselves
something more than the claim of being re-translators of a translation: the
present edition is, so far as they were able to make it so, an adaptation,
correction, and extension of the work of the great German scholar to whose
loving appreciation of the Anglo-Saxon epic all students of Old English owe
a debt of gratitude. While following his usually sure and cautious
guidance, and in the main appropriating his results, they have thought it
best to deviate from him in the manner above indicated, whenever it seemed
that he was wrong. The careful reader will notice at once the marks of
interrogation which point out these deviations, or which introduce a point
of view illustrative of, or supplementary to, the one given by the German
editor. No doubt the editors are wrong themselves in many
places,--"Beowulf" is a most difficult poem,--but their view may at least
be defended by a reference to the original text, which they have faithfully
and constantly consulted.

A good many cognate Modern English words have been introduced here and
there in the Glossary with a view to illustration, and other addenda will
be found between brackets and parenthetical marks.

It is hoped that the present edition of the most famous of Old English
poems will do something to promote a valuable and interesting study.


JAMES A. HARRISON,
_Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va._

ROBERT SHARP,
_University of Louisiana, New Orleans_.

April, 1883.


The responsibility of the editors is as follows: H. is responsible for the
Text, and for the Glossary from hrinan on; S. for the List of Names, and
for the Glossary as far as hrinan.

ARGUMENT.

The only national [Anglo-Saxon] epic which has been preserved entire is
Beowulf. Its argument is briefly as follows:--The poem opens with a few
verses in praise of the Danish Kings, especially Scild, the son of Sceaf.
His death is related, and his descendants briefly traced down to Hroethgar.
Hroethgar, elated with his prosperity and success in war, builds a
magnificent hall, which he calls Heorot. In this hall Hroethgar and his
retainers live in joy and festivity, until a malignant fiend, called
Grendel, jealous of their happiness, carries off by night thirty of
Hroethgar's men, and devours them in his moorland retreat. These ravages go
on for twelve years. Beowulf, a thane of Hygelac, King of the Goths,
hearing of Hroethgar's calamities, sails from Sweden with fourteen
warriors--to help him. They reach the Danish coast in safety; and, after an
animated parley with Hroethgar's coastguard, who at first takes them for
pirates, they are allowed to proceed to the royal hall, where they are well
received by Hroethgar. A banquet ensues, during which Beowulf is taunted by
the envious Hunferheth about his swimming-match with Breca, King of the
Brondings. Beowulf gives the true account of the contest, and silences
Hunferheth. At night-fall the King departs, leaving Beowulf in charge of the
hall. Grendel soon breaks in, seizes and devours one of Beowulf's
companions; is attacked by Beowulf, and, after losing an arm, which is torn
off by Beowulf, escapes to the fens. The joy of Hroethgar and the Danes, and
their festivities, are described, various episodes are introduced, and
Beowulf and his companions receive splendid gifts. The next night Grendel's
mother revenges her son by carrying off AEschere, the friend and councillor
of Hroethgar, during the absence of Beowulf. Hroethgar appeals to Beowulf for
vengeance, and describes the haunts of Grendel and his mother. They all
proceed thither; the scenery of the lake, and the monsters that dwell in
it, are described. Beowulf plunges into the water, and attacks Grendel's
mother in her dwelling at the bottom of the lake. He at length overcomes
her, and cuts off her head, together with that of Grendel, and brings the
heads to Hroethgar. He then takes leave of Hroethgar, sails back to Sweden, and
relates his adventures to Hygelac. Here the first half of the poem ends.
The second begins with the accession of Beowulf to the throne, after the
fall of Hygelac and his son Heardred. He rules prosperously for fifty
years, till a dragon, brooding over a hidden treasure, begins to ravage the
country, and destroys Beowulf's palace with fire. Beowulf sets out in quest
of its hiding-place, with twelve men. Having a presentiment of his
approaching end, he pauses and recalls to mind his past life and exploits.
He then takes leave of his followers, one by one, and advances alone to
attack the dragon. Unable, from the heat, to enter the cavern, he shouts
aloud, and the dragon comes forth. The dragon's scaly hide is proof against
Beowulf's sword, and he is reduced to great straits. Then Wiglaf, one of
his followers, advances to help him. Wiglaf's shield is consumed by the
dragon's fiery breath, and he is compelled to seek shelter under Beowulf's
shield of iron. Beowulf's sword snaps asunder, and he is seized by the
dragon. Wiglaf stabs the dragon from underneath, and Beowulf cuts it in two
with his dagger. Feeling that his end is near, he bids Wiglaf bring out the
treasures from the cavern, that he may see them before he dies. Wiglaf
enters the dragon's den, which is described, returns to Beowulf, and
receives his last commands. Beowulf dies, and Wiglaf bitterly reproaches
his companions for their cowardice. The disastrous consequences of
Beowulf's death are then foretold, and the poem ends with his funeral.--H.
Sweet, in Warton's _History of English Poetry_, Vol. II. (ed. 1871). Cf.
also Ten Brink's _History of English Literature_.




BEOWULF.


I. THE PASSING OF SCYLD.

     Hwaet! we Gar-Dena      in gear-dagum
     þeod-cyninga      þrym gefrunon,
     hu þa aeethelingas      ellen fremedon.
     Oft Scyld Scefing      sceaethena þreatum,
5    monegum maegethum      meodo-setla ofteah.
     Egsode eorl,      syethethan aerest weareth
     fea-sceaft funden:      he þaes frofre gebad,
     weox under wolcnum,      weoreth-myndum ethah,
     oeth þaet him aeghwylc      þara ymb-sittendra
10   ofer hron-rade      hyran scolde,
     gomban gyldan:      þaet waes god cyning!
     þaem eafera waes      aefter cenned
     geong in geardum,      þone god sende
     folce to frofre;      fyren-þearfe ongeat,
15   þaet hie aer drugon      aldor-lease
     lange hwile.      Him þaes lif-frea,
     wuldres wealdend,      worold-are forgeaf;
     Beowulf waes breme      (blaed wide sprang),
     Scyldes eafera      Scede-landum in.
20   Swa sceal geong guma,      gode gewyrcean,
     fromum feoh-giftum      on faeder wine,
     þaet hine on ylde      eft gewunigen
     wil-gesiethas,      þonne wig cume,
     leode gelaesten:      lof-daedum sceal
25   in maegetha gehwaere      man geþeon.
     Him þa Scyld gewat      to gescaep-hwile
     fela-hror feran      on frean waere;
     hi hyne þa aetbaeron      to brimes faroethe.
     swaese gesiethas,      swa he selfa baed,
30   þenden wordum weold      wine Scyldinga,
     leof land-fruma      lange ahte.
     Þaer aet hyethe stod      hringed-stefna,
     isig and utfus,      aeethelinges faer;
     a-ledon þa      leofne þeoden,
35   beaga bryttan      on bearm scipes,
     maerne be maeste.      Þaer waes madma fela,
     of feor-wegum      fraetwa gelaeded:
     ne hyrde ic cymlicor      ceol gegyrwan
     hilde-waepnum      and heaetho-waedum,
40   billum and byrnum;      him on bearme laeg
     madma maenigo,      þa him mid scoldon
     on flodes aeht      feor gewitan.
     Nalas hi hine laessan      lacum teodan,
     þeod-gestreonum,      þonne þa dydon,
45   þe hine aet frumsceafte      foreth onsendon
     aenne ofer yethe      umbor wesende:
     þa gyt hie him asetton      segen gyldenne
     heah ofer heafod,      leton holm beran,
     geafon on gar-secg:      him waes geomor sefa,
50   murnende mod.      Men ne cunnon
     secgan to soethe      sele-raedende,
     haeleeth under heofenum,      hwa þaem hlaeste onfeng.


II. THE HALL HEOROT.

     Þa waes on burgum      Beowulf Scyldinga,
     leof leod-cyning,      longe þrage
55   folcum gefraege      (faeder ellor hwearf,
     aldor of earde),      oeth þaet him eft onwoc
     heah Healfdene;      heold þenden lifde,
     gamol and gueth-reow,      glaede Scyldingas.
     Þaem feower bearn      foreth-gerimed
60   in worold wocun,      weoroda raeswan,
     Heorogar and Hroethgar      and Halga til;
     hyrde ic, þat Elan cwen      Ongenþeowes waes
     Heaethoscilfinges      heals-gebedde.
     Þa waes Hroethgare      here-sped gyfen,
65   wiges weoreth-mynd,      þaet him his wine-magas
     georne hyrdon,      oeth þaet seo geogoeth geweox,
     mago-driht micel.      Him on mod bearn,
     þaet heal-reced      hatan wolde,
     medo-aern micel      men gewyrcean,
70   þone yldo bearn      aefre gefrunon,
     and þaer on innan      eall gedaelan
     geongum and ealdum,      swylc him god sealde,
     buton folc-scare      and feorum gumena.
     Þa ic wide gefraegn      weorc gebannan
75   manigre maegethe      geond þisne middan-geard,
     folc-stede fraetwan.      Him on fyrste gelomp
     aedre mid yldum,      þaet hit weareth eal gearo,
     heal-aerna maest;      scop him Heort naman,
     se þe his wordes geweald      wide haefde.
80   He beot ne aleh,      beagas daelde,
     sinc aet symle.      Sele hlifade
     heah and horn-geap:      heaetho-wylma bad,
     laethan liges;      ne waes hit lenge þa gen
     þaet se ecg-hete      aethum-swerian
85   aefter wael-niethe      waecnan scolde.
     Þa se ellen-gaest      earfoethlice
     þrage geþolode,      se þe in þystrum bad,
     þaet he dogora gehwam      dream gehyrde
     hludne in healle;      þaer waes hearpan sweg,
90   swutol sang scopes.      Saegde se þe cuethe
     frum-sceaft fira      feorran reccan,
     cwaeeth þaet se aelmihtiga      eorethan worhte,
     wlite-beorhtne wang,      swa waeter bebugeeth,
     gesette sige-hreethig      sunnan and monan
95   leoman to leohte      land-buendum,
     and gefraetwade      foldan sceatas
     leomum and leafum;      lif eac gesceop
     cynna gehwylcum,      þara þe cwice hwyrfaeth.
     Swa þa driht-guman      dreamum lifdon
100  eadiglice,      oeth þaet an ongan
     fyrene fremman,      feond on helle:
     waes se grimma gaest      Grendel haten,
     maere mearc-stapa,      se þe moras heold,
     fen and faesten;      fifel-cynnes eard
105  won-saelig wer      weardode hwile,
     siethethan him scyppend      forscrifen haefde.
     In Caines cynne      þone cwealm gewraec,
     ece drihten,      þaes þe he Abel slog;
     ne gefeah he þaere faehethe,      ac he hine feor forwraec,
110  metod for þy mane      man-cynne fram.
     Þanon untydras      ealle onwocon,
     eotenas and ylfe      and orcneas,
     swylce gigantas,      þa wieth gode wunnon
     lange þrage;      he him þaes lean forgeald.


III. GRENDEL'S VISITS.

115  Gewat þa neosian,      syethethan niht becom,
     hean huses,      hu hit Hring-Dene
     aefter beor-þege      gebun haefdon.
     Fand þa þaer inne      aeethelinga gedriht
     swefan aefter symble;      sorge ne cuethon,
120  won-sceaft wera.      Wiht unhaelo
     grim and graedig      gearo sona waes,
     reoc and reethe,      and on raeste genam
     þritig þegna:      þanon eft gewat
     huethe hremig      to ham faran,
125  mid þaere wael-fylle      wica neosan.
     Þa waes on uhtan      mid aer-daege
     Grendles gueth-craeft      gumum undyrne:
     þa waes aefter wiste      wop up ahafen,
     micel morgen-sweg.      Maere þeoden,
130  aeetheling aer-god,      unbliethe saet,
     þolode þryeth-swyeth,      þegn-sorge dreah,
     syethethan hie þaes laethan      last sceawedon,
     wergan gastes;      waes þaet gewin to strang,
     laeth and longsum.      Naes hit lengra fyrst,
135  ac ymb ane niht      eft gefremede
     moreth-beala mare      and no mearn fore
     faehethe and fyrene;      waes to faest on þam.
     Þa waes eaeth-fynde,      þe him elles hwaer
     gerumlicor      raeste sohte,
140  bed aefter burum,      þa him gebeacnod waes,
     gesaegd soethlice      sweotolan tacne
     heal-þegnes hete;      heold hine syethethan
     fyr and faestor,      se þaem feonde aetwand.
     Swa rixode      and wieth rihte wan
145  ana wieth eallum,      oeth þaet idel stod
     husa selest.      Waes seo hwil micel:
     twelf wintra tid      torn geþolode
     wine Scyldinga,      weana gehwelcne,
     sidra sorga;      forþam syethethan weareth
150  ylda bearnum      undyrne cueth,
     gyddum geomore,      þaette Grendel wan,
     hwile wieth Hroethgar;--      hete-niethas waeg,
     fyrene and faehethe      fela missera,
     singale saece,      sibbe ne wolde
155  wieth manna hwone      maegenes Deniga
     feorh-bealo feorran,      feo þingian,
     ne þaer naenig witena      wenan þorfte
     beorhtre bote      to banan folmum;
     atol aeglaeca      ehtende waes,
160  deorc deaeth-scua      duguethe and geogoethe
     seomade and syrede.      Sin-nihte heold
     mistige moras;      men ne cunnon,
     hwyder hel-runan      hwyrftum scriethaeth.
     Swa fela fyrena      feond man-cynnes,
165  atol an-gengea,      oft gefremede
     heardra hynetha;      Heorot eardode,
     sinc-fage sel      sweartum nihtum
     (no he þone gif-stol      gretan moste,
     maethethum for metode,      ne his myne wisse);
170  þaet waes wraec micel      wine Scyldinga,
     modes brecetha.      Monig-oft gesaet
     rice to rune;      raed eahtedon,
     hwaet swieth-ferhethum      selest waere
     wieth faer-gryrum      to gefremmanne.
175  Hwilum hie geheton      aet haerg-trafum
     wig-weorethunga,      wordum baedon,
     þaet him gast-bona      geoce gefremede
     wieth þeod-þreaum.      Swylc waes þeaw hyra,
     haeethenra hyht;      helle gemundon
180  in mod-sefan,      metod hie ne cuethon,
     daeda demend,      ne wiston hie drihten god,
     ne hie huru heofena helm      herian ne cuethon,
     wuldres waldend.      Wa bieth þaem þe sceal
     þurh sliethne nieth      sawle bescufan
185  in fyres faeethm,      frofre ne wenan,
     wihte gewendan;      wel bieth þaem þe mot
     aefter deaeth-daege      drihten secean
     and to faeder faeethmum      freoetho wilnian.


IV. HYGELAC'S THANE.

     Swa þa mael-ceare      maga Healfdenes
190  singala seaeth;      ne mihte snotor haeleeth
     wean onwendan:      waes þaet gewin to swyeth,
     laeth and longsum,      þe on þa leode becom,
     nyd-wracu nieth-grim,      niht-bealwa maest.
     Þaet fram ham gefraegn      Higelaces þegn,
195  god mid Geatum,      Grendles daeda:
     se waes mon-cynnes      maegenes strengest
     on þaem daege      þysses lifes,
     aeethele and eacen.      Het him yeth-lidan
     godne gegyrwan;      cwaeeth he gueth-cyning
200  ofer swan-rade      secean wolde,
     maerne þeoden,      þa him waes manna þearf.
     Þone sieth-faet him      snotere ceorlas
     lyt-hwon logon,      þeah he him leof waere;
     hwetton higerofne,      hael sceawedon.
205  Haefde se goda      Geata leoda
     cempan gecorone,      þara þe he cenoste
     findan mihte;      fiftena sum
     sund-wudu sohte;      secg wisade,
     lagu-craeftig mon,      land-gemyrcu.
210  Fyrst foreth gewat:      flota waes on yethum,
     bat under beorge.      Beornas gearwe
     on stefn stigon;      streamas wundon
     sund wieth sande;      secgas baeron
     on bearm nacan      beorhte fraetwe,
215  gueth-searo geatolic;      guman ut scufon,
     weras on wil-sieth      wudu bundenne.
     Gewat þa ofer waeg-holm      winde gefysed
     flota famig-heals      fugle gelicost,
     oeth þaet ymb an-tid      oethres dogores
220  wunden-stefna      gewaden haefde,
     þaet þa liethende      land gesawon,
     brim-clifu blican,      beorgas steape,
     side sae-naessas:      þa waes sund liden,
     eoletes aet ende.      Þanon up hraethe
225  Wedera leode      on wang stigon,
     sae-wudu saeldon      (syrcan hrysedon,
     gueth-gewaedo);      gode þancedon,
     þaes þe him yeth-lade      eaethe wurdon.
     Þa of wealle geseah      weard Scildinga,
230  se þe holm-clifu      healdan scolde,
     beran ofer bolcan      beorhte randas,
     fyrd-searu fuslicu;      hine fyrwyt braec
     mod-gehygdum,      hwaet þa men waeron.
     Gewat him þa to waroethe      wicge ridan
235  þegn Hroethgares,      þrymmum cwehte
     maegen-wudu mundum,      meethel-wordum fraegn:
     "Hwaet syndon ge      searo-haebbendra
     "byrnum werede,      þe þus brontne ceol
     "ofer lagu-straete      laedan cwomon,
240  "hider ofer holmas      helmas baeron?
     "Ic waes ende-saeta,      aeg-wearde heold,
     "þaet on land Dena      laethra naenig
     "mid scip-herge      sceethethan ne meahte.
     "No her cuethlicor      cuman ongunnon
245  "lind-haebbende;      ne ge leafnes-word
     "gueth-fremmendra      gearwe ne wisson,
     "maga gemedu.      Naefre ic maran geseah
     "eorla ofer eorethan,      þonne is eower sum,
     "secg on searwum;      nis þaet seld-guma
250 "waepnum geweorethad,      naefne him his wlite leoge,
     "aenlic an-syn.      Nu ic eower sceal
     "frum-cyn witan,      aer ge fyr heonan
     "lease sceaweras      on land Dena
     "furethur feran.      Nu ge feor-buend,
255  "mere-liethende,      minne gehyraeth
     "an-fealdne geþoht:      ofost is selest
     "to gecyethanne,      hwanan eowre cyme syndon."


V. THE ERRAND.

     Him se yldesta      andswarode,
     werodes wisa,      word-hord onleac:
260  "We synt gum-cynnes      Geata leode
     "and Higelaces      heoreth-geneatas.
     "Waes min faeder      folcum gecyethed,
     "aeethele ord-fruma      Ecgþeow haten;
     "gebad wintra worn,      aer he on weg hwurfe,
265  "gamol of geardum;      hine gearwe geman
     "witena wel-hwylc      wide geond eorethan.--
     "We þurh holdne hige      hlaford þinne,
     "sunu Healfdenes,      secean cwomon,
     "leod-gebyrgean:      wes þu us larena god!
270  "Habbaeth we to þaem maeran      micel aerende
     "Deniga frean;      ne sceal þaer dyrne sum
     "wesan, þaes ic wene.      Þu wast, gif hit is,
     "swa we soethlice      secgan hyrdon,
     "þaet mid Scyldingum      sceaetha ic nat hwylc,
275  "deogol daed-hata,      deorcum nihtum
     "eaweeth þurh egsan      uncuethne nieth,
     "hynethu and hra-fyl.      Ic þaes Hroethgar maeg
     "þurh rumne sefan      raed gelaeran,
     "hu he frod and god      feond oferswyetheeth,
280  "gyf him ed-wendan      aefre scolde
     "bealuwa bisigu,      bot eft cuman
     "and þa cear-wylmas      colran wurethaeth;
     "oethethe a syethethan      earfoeth-þrage,
     "þrea-nyd þolaeth,      þenden þaer wunaeth
285  "on heah-stede      husa selest."
     Weard maethelode,      þaer on wicge saet
     ombeht unforht:      "AEghwaeethres sceal
     "scearp scyld-wiga      gescad witan,
     "worda and worca,      se þe wel þenceeth.
290  "Ic þaet gehyre,      þaet þis is hold weorod
     "frean Scyldinga.      Gewitaeth foreth beran
     "waepen and gewaedu,      ic eow wisige:
     "swylce ic magu-þegnas      mine hate
     "wieth feonda gehwone      flotan eowerne,
295  "niw-tyrwedne      nacan on sande
     "arum healdan,      oeth þaet eft byreeth
     "ofer lagu-streamas      leofne mannan
     "wudu wunden-hals      to Weder-mearce.
     "Gueth-fremmendra      swylcum gifeethe bieth,
300  "þaet þone hilde-raes      hal gedigeeth."
     Gewiton him þa feran      (flota stille bad,
     seomode on sale      sid-faeethmed scyp,
     on ancre faest);      eofor-lic scionon
     ofer hleor-beran      gehroden golde
305  fah and fyr-heard,      ferh wearde heold.
     Guethmode grummon,      guman onetton,
     sigon aetsomne,      oeth þaet hy sael timbred
     geatolic and gold-fah      ongytan mihton;
     þaet waes fore-maerost      fold-buendum
310  receda under roderum,      on þaem se rica bad;
     lixte se leoma      ofer landa fela.
     Him þa hilde-deor      hof modigra
     torht getaehte,      þaet hie him to mihton
     gegnum gangan;      gueth-beorna sum
315  wicg gewende,      word aefter cwaeeth:
     "Mael is me to feran;      faeder alwalda
     "mid ar-stafum      eowic gehealde
     "sietha gesunde!      ic to sae wille,
     "wieth wraeth werod      wearde healdan."


VI. BEOWULF'S SPEECH.

320  Straet waes stan-fah,      stig wisode
     gumum aetgaedere.      Gueth-byrne scan
     heard hond-locen,      hring-iren scir
     song in searwum,      þa hie to sele furethum
     in hyra gryre-geatwum      gangan cwomon.
325  Setton sae-meethe      side scyldas,
     rondas regn-hearde      wieth þaes recedes weal,
     bugon þa to bence;      byrnan hringdon,
     gueth-searo gumena;      garas stodon,
     sae-manna searo,      samod aetgaedere,
330  aesc-holt ufan graeg:      waes se iren-þreat
     waepnum gewurethad.      Þa þaer wlonc haeleeth
     oret-mecgas      aefter aeethelum fraegn:
     "Hwanon ferigeaeth ge      faette scyldas,
     "graege syrcan      and grim-helmas,
335  "here-sceafta heap?--      Ic eom Hroethgares
     "ar and ombiht.      Ne seah ic el-þeodige
     "þus manige men      modiglicran.
     "Wen' ic þaet ge for wlenco,      nalles for wraec-siethum,
     "ac for hige-þrymmum      Hroethgar sohton."
340  Him þa ellen-rof      andswarode,
     wlanc Wedera leod      word aefter spraec,
     heard under helme:      "We synt Higelaces
     "beod-geneatas;      Beowulf is min nama.
     "Wille ic asecgan      suna Healfdenes,
345  "maerum þeodne      min aerende,
     "aldre þinum,      gif he us geunnan wile,
     "þaet we hine swa godne      gretan moton."
     Wulfgar maethelode      (þaet waes Wendla leod,
     waes his mod-sefa      manegum gecyethed,
350  wig and wis-dom):      "ic þaes wine Deniga,
     "frean Scildinga      frinan wille,
     "beaga bryttan,      swa þu bena eart,
     "þeoden maerne      ymb þinne sieth ;
     "and þe þa andsware      aedre gecyethan,
355  "þe me se goda      agifan þenceeth."
     Hwearf þa hraedlice,      þaer Hroethgar saet,
     eald and unhar      mid his eorla gedriht;
     eode ellen-rof,      þaet he for eaxlum gestod
     Deniga frean,      cuethe he duguethe þeaw.
360  Wulfgar maethelode      to his wine-drihtne:
     "Her syndon geferede      feorran cumene
     "ofer geofenes begang      Geata leode:
     "þone yldestan      oret-mecgas
     "Beowulf nemnaeth.      Hy benan synt,
365  "þaet hie, þeoden min,      wieth þe moton
     "wordum wrixlan;      no þu him wearne geteoh,
     "þinra gegn-cwida      glaednian, Hroethgar!
     "Hy on wig-geatwum      wyrethe þinceaeth
     "eorla geaehtlan;      huru se aldor deah,
370  "se þaem heaetho-rincum      hider wisade."


VII. HROTHGAR'S WELCOME.

     Hroethgar maethelode,      helm Scyldinga:
     "Ic hine cuethe      cniht-wesende.
     "Waes his eald-faeder      Ecgþeo haten,
     "þaem to ham forgeaf      Hreethel Geata
375  "angan dohtor;      is his eafora nu
     "heard her cumen,      sohte holdne wine.
     "þonne saegdon þaet      sae-liethende,
     "þa þe gif-sceattas      Geata fyredon
     "þyder to þance,      þaet he þrittiges
380  "manna maegen-craeft      on his mund-gripe
     "heaetho-rof haebbe.      Hine halig god
     "for ar-stafum      us onsende,
     "to West-Denum,      þaes ic wen haebbe,
     "wieth Grendles gryre:      ic þaem godan sceal
385  "for his mod-þraece      madmas beodan.
     "Beo þu on ofeste,      hat hig in gan,
     "seon sibbe-gedriht      samod aetgaedere;
     "gesaga him eac wordum,      þaet hie sint wil-cuman
     "Deniga leodum."      Þa wieth duru healle
390  Wulfgar eode,      word inne abead:
     "Eow het secgan      sige-drihten min,
     "aldor East-Dena,      þaet he eower aeethelu can
     "and ge him syndon      ofer sae-wylmas,
     "heard-hicgende,      hider wil-cuman.
395  "Nu ge moton gangan      in eowrum gueth-geatawum,
     "under here-griman,      Hroethgar geseon;
     "laetaeth hilde-bord      her onbidian,
     "wudu wael-sceaftas,      worda geþinges."
     Aras þa se rica,      ymb hine rinc manig,
400  þryethlic þegna heap;      sume þaer bidon,
     heaetho-reaf heoldon,      swa him se hearda bebead.
     Snyredon aetsomne,      þa secg wisode
     under Heorotes hrof;      hyge-rof eode,
     heard under helme,      þaet he on heoethe gestod.
405  Beowulf maethelode      (on him byrne scan,
     searo-net seowed      smiethes or-þancum):
     "Wes þu Hroethgar hal!      ic eom Higelaces
     "maeg and mago-þegn;      haebbe ic maeretha fela
     "ongunnen on geogoethe.      Me weareth Grendles þing
410  "on minre eethel-tyrf      undyrne cueth:
     "secgaeth sae-liethend,      þaet þes sele stande,
     "reced selesta,      rinca gehwylcum
     "idel and unnyt,      siethethan aefen-leoht
     "under heofenes hador      beholen weoretheeth.
415  "Þa me þaet gelaerdon      leode mine,
     "þa selestan,      snotere ceorlas,
     "þeoden Hroethgar,      þaet ic þe sohte;
     "forþan hie maegenes craeft      minne cuethon:
     "selfe ofersawon,      þa ic of searwum cwom,
420  "fah from feondum,      þaer ic fife geband,
     "yethde eotena cyn,      and on yethum slog
     "niceras nihtes,      nearo-þearfe dreah,
     "wraec Wedera nieth      (wean ahsodon)
     "forgrand gramum;      and nu wieth Grendel sceal,
425  "wieth þam aglaecan,      ana gehegan
     "þing wieth þyrse.      Ic þe nu þa,
     "brego Beorht-Dena,      biddan wille,
     "eodor Scyldinga,      anre bene;
     "þaet þu me ne forwyrne,      wigendra hleo,
430  "freo-wine folca,      nu ic þus feorran com,
     "þaet ic mote ana      and minra eorla gedryht,
     "þes hearda heap,      Heorot faelsian.
     "Haebbe ic eac geahsod,      þaet se aeglaeca
     "for his won-hydum      waepna ne receeth;
435  "ic þaet þonne forhicge,      swa me Higelac sie,
     "min mon-drihten,      modes bliethe,
     "þaet ic sweord bere      oethethe sidne scyld
     "geolo-rand to guethe;      ac ic mid grape sceal
     "fon wieth feonde      and ymb feorh sacan,
440  "laeth wieth laethum;      þaer gelyfan sceal
     "dryhtnes dome      se þe hine deaeth nimeeth.
     "Wen' ic þaet he wille,      gif he wealdan mot,
     "in þaem gueth-sele      Geatena leode
     "etan unforhte,      swa he oft dyde
445  "maegen Hreethmanna.      Na þu minne þearft
     "hafalan hydan,      ac he me habban wile
     "dreore fahne,      gif mec deaeth nimeeth;
     "byreeth blodig wael,      byrgean þenceeth,
     "eteeth an-genga      unmurnlice,
450  "mearcaeth mor-hopu:      no þu ymb mines ne þearft
     "lices feorme      leng sorgian.
     "Onsend Higelace,      gif mec hild nime,
     "beadu-scruda betst,      þaet mine breost wereeth,
     "hraegla selest;      þaet is Hreethlan laf,
455  "Welandes geweorc.      Gaeeth a Wyrd swa hio scel!"


VIII. HROTHGAR TELLS OF GRENDEL.

     Hroethgar maethelode,      helm Scyldinga:
     "for were-fyhtum þu,      wine min Beowulf,
     "and for ar-stafum      usic sohtest.
     "Gesloh þin faeder      faehethe maeste,
460  "weareth he Heaetholafe      to hand-bonan
     "mid Wilfingum;      þa hine Wedera cyn
     "for here-brogan      habban ne mihte.
     "Þanon he gesohte      Sueth-Dena folc
     "ofer yetha gewealc,      Ar-Scyldinga;
465  "þa ic furethum weold      folce Deninga,
     "and on geogoethe heold      gimme-rice
     "hord-burh haeleetha:      þa waes Heregar dead,
     "min yldra maeg      unlifigende,
     "bearn Healfdenes.      Se waes betera þonne ic!
470  "Siethethan þa faehethe      feo þingode;
     "sende ic Wylfingum      ofer waeteres hrycg
     "ealde madmas:      he me aethas swor.
     "Sorh is me to secganne      on sefan minum
     "gumena aengum,      hwaet me Grendel hafaeth
475  "hynetho on Heorote      mid his hete-þancum,
     "faer-nietha gefremed.      Is min flet-werod,
     "wig-heap gewanod;      hie Wyrd forsweop
     "on Grendles gryre.      God eaethe maeg
     "þone dol-scaethan      daeda getwaefan!
480  "Ful oft gebeotedon      beore druncne
     "ofer ealo-waege      oret-mecgas,
     "þaet hie in beor-sele      bidan woldon
     "Grendles guethe      mid gryrum ecga.
     "Þonne waes þeos medo-heal      on morgen-tid,
485  "driht-sele dreor-fah,      þonne daeg lixte,
     "eal benc-þelu      blode bestymed,
     "heall heoru-dreore:      ahte ic holdra þy laes,
     "deorre duguethe,      þe þa deaeth fornam.
     "Site nu to symle      and onsael meoto,
490  "sige-hreeth secgum,      swa þin sefa hwette!"
     Þa waes Geat-maecgum      geador aetsomne
     on beor-sele      benc gerymed;
     þaer swieth-ferhethe      sittan eodon
     þryethum dealle.      Þegn nytte beheold,
495  se þe on handa baer      hroden ealo-waege,
     scencte scir wered.      Scop hwilum sang
     hador on Heorote;      þaer waes haeleetha dream,
     dugueth unlytel      Dena and Wedera.


IX. HUNFERTH OBJECTS TO BEOWULF.

     Unfereth maethelode,      Ecglafes bearn,
500  þe aet fotum saet      frean Scyldinga;
     onband beadu-rune      (waes him Beowulfes sieth,
     modges mere-faran,      micel aef-þunca,
     forþon þe he ne uethe,      þaet aenig oether man
     aefre maeretha þon ma      middan-geardes
505  gehedde under heofenum      þonne he sylfa):
     "Eart þu se Beowulf,      se þe wieth Brecan wunne,
     "on sidne sae      ymb sund flite,
     "þaer git for wlence      wada cunnedon
     "and for dol-gilpe      on deop waeter
510  "aldrum neethdon?      Ne inc aenig mon,
     "ne leof ne laeth,      belean mihte
     "sorh-fullne sieth;      þa git on sund reon,
     "þaer git eagor-stream      earmum þehton,
     "maeton mere-straeta,      mundum brugdon,
515  "glidon ofer gar-secg;      geofon yethum weol,
     "wintres wylme.      Git on waeteres aeht
     "seofon niht swuncon;      he þe aet sunde oferflat,
     "haefde mare maegen.      Þa hine on morgen-tid
     "on Heaetho-raemas      holm up aetbaer,
520  "þonon he gesohte      swaesne eethel
     "leof his leodum      lond Brondinga,
     "freoetho-burh faegere,      þaer he folc ahte,
     "burg and beagas.      Beot eal wieth þe
     "sunu Beanstanes      soethe gelaeste.
525  "Þonne wene ic to þe      wyrsan geþinges,
     "þeah þu heaetho-raesa      gehwaer dohte,
     "grimre guethe,      gif þu Grendles dearst
     "niht-longne fyrst      nean bidan!"
     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
530  "Hwaet þu worn fela,      wine min Unfereth,
     "beore druncen      ymb Brecan spraece,
     "saegdest from his siethe!      Soeth ic talige,
     "þaet ic mere-strengo      maran ahte,
     "earfeetho on yethum,      þonne aenig oether man.
535  "Wit þaet gecwaedon      cniht-wesende
     "and gebeotedon      (waeron begen þa git
     "on geogoeth-feore)      þaet wit on gar-secg ut
     "aldrum neethdon;      and þaet geaefndon swa.
     "Haefdon swurd nacod,      þa wit on sund reon,
540  "heard on handa,      wit unc wieth hron-fixas
     "werian þohton.      No he wiht fram me
     "flod-yethum feor      fleotan meahte,
     "hraethor on holme,      no ic fram him wolde.
     "Þa wit aetsomne      on sae waeron
545  "fif nihta fyrst,      oeth þaet unc flod todraf,
     "wado weallende,      wedera cealdost,
     "nipende niht      and norethan wind
     "heaetho-grim andhwearf;      hreo waeron yetha,
     "Waes mere-fixa      mod onhrered:
550  "þaer me wieth laethum      lic-syrce min,
     "heard hond-locen,      helpe gefremede;
     "beado-hraegl broden      on breostum laeg,
     "golde gegyrwed.      Me to grunde teah
     "fah feond-scaetha,      faeste haefde
555  "grim on grape:      hwaeethre me gyfeethe weareth,
     "þaet ic aglaecan      orde geraehte,
     "hilde-bille;      heaetho-raes fornam
     "mihtig mere-deor      þurh mine hand.


X. BEOWULF'S CONTEST WITH BRECA.--THE FEAST.

     "Swa mec gelome      laeth-geteonan
560  "þreatedon þearle.      Ic him þenode
     "deoran sweorde,      swa hit gedefe waes;
     "naes hie þaere fylle      gefean haefdon,
     "man-fordaedlan,      þaet hie me þegon,
     "symbel ymb-saeton      sae-grunde neah,
565  "ac on mergenne      mecum wunde
     "be yeth-lafe      uppe laegon,
     "sweordum aswefede,      þaet syethethan na
     "ymb brontne ford      brim-liethende
     "lade ne letton.      Leoht eastan com,
570  "beorht beacen godes;      brimu swaethredon,
     "þaet ic sae-naessas      geseon mihte,
     "windige weallas.      Wyrd oft nereeth
     "unfaegne eorl,      ethonne his ellen deah!
     "Hwaeethere me gesaelde,      þaet ic mid sweorde ofsloh
575  "niceras nigene.      No ic on niht gefraegn
     "under heofones hwealf      heardran feohtan,
     "ne on eg-streamum      earmran mannan;
     "hwaeethere ic fara feng      feore gedigde,
     "siethes werig.      Þa mec sae oethbaer,
580  "flod aefter faroethe,      on Finna land,
     "wadu weallendu.      No ic wiht fram þe
     "swylcra searo-nietha      secgan hyrde,
     "billa brogan:      Breca naefre git
     "aet heaetho-lace,      ne gehwaeether incer
585  "swa deorlice      daed gefremede
     "fagum sweordum      . . . . . . .
     ". . . . . . .      no ic þaes gylpe;
     "þeah þu þinum broethrum      to banan wurde,
     "heafod-maegum;      þaes þu in helle scealt
590  "werhetho dreogan,      þeah þin wit duge,
     "Secge ic þe to soethe,      sunu Ecglafes,
     "þaet naefre Grendel swa fela      gryra gefremede,
     "atol aeglaeca      ealdre þinum,
     "hynetho on Heorote,      gif þin hige waere,
595  "sefa swa searo-grim,      swa þu self talast.
     "Ac he hafaeth onfunden,      þaet he þa faehethe ne þearf,
     "atole ecg-þraece      eower leode
     "swiethe onsittan,      Sige-Scyldinga;
     "nymeeth nyd-bade,      naenegum araeth
600  "leode Deniga,      ac he on lust wigeeth,
     "swefeeth ond sendeeth,      secce ne weneeth
     "to Gar-Denum.      Ac him Geata sceal
     "eafoeth and ellen      ungeara nu
     "guethe gebeodan.      Gaeeth eft se þe mot
605  "to medo modig,      siethethan morgen-leoht
     "ofer ylda bearn      oethres dogores,
     "sunne swegl-wered      suethan scineeth!"
     Þa waes on salum      sinces brytta
     gamol-feax and gueth-rof,      geoce gelyfde
610  brego Beorht-Dena;      gehyrde on Beowulfe
     folces hyrde      faest-raedne geþoht.
     Þaer waes haeleetha hleahtor;      hlyn swynsode,
     word waeron wynsume.      Eode Wealhþeow foreth,
     cwen Hroethgares,      cynna gemyndig,
615  grette gold-hroden      guman on healle,
     and þa freolic wif      ful gesealde
     aerest East-Dena      eethel-wearde,
     baed hine bliethne      aet þaere beor-þege,
     leodum leofne;      he on lust geþeah
620  symbel and sele-ful,      sige-rof kyning.
     Ymb-eode þa      ides Helminga
     duguethe and geogoethe      dael aeghwylcne;
     sinc-fato sealde,      oeth þaet sael alamp,
     þaet hio Beowulfe,      beag-hroden cwen,
625  mode geþungen,      medo-ful aetbaer;
     grette Geata leod,      gode þancode
     wis-faest wordum,      þaes þe hire se willa gelamp,
     þaet heo on aenigne      eorl gelyfde
     fyrena frofre.      He þaet ful geþeah,
630  wael-reow wiga      aet Wealhþeon,
     and þa gyddode      guethe gefysed,
     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
     "Ic þaet hogode,      þa ic on holm gestah,
     "sae-bat gesaet      mid minra secga gedriht,
635  "þaet ic anunga      eowra leoda
     "willan geworhte,      oethethe on wael crunge,
     "feond-grapum faest.      Ic gefremman sceal
     "eorlic ellen,      oethethe ende-daeg
     "on þisse meodu-healle      minne gebidan."
640  Þam wife þa word      wel licodon,
     gilp-cwide Geates;      eode gold-hroden
     freolicu folc-cwen      to hire frean sittan.
     Þa waes eft swa aer      inne on healle
     þryeth-word sprecen,      þeod on saelum,
645  sige-folca sweg,      oeth þaet semninga
     sunu Healfdenes      secean wolde
     aefen-raeste;      wiste aet þaem ahlaecan
     to þaem heah-sele      hilde geþinged,
     siethethan hie sunnan leoht      geseon ne meahton,
650  oethethe nipende      niht ofer ealle,
     scadu-helma gesceapu      scriethan cwoman,
     wan under wolcnum.      Werod eall aras.
     Grette þa giddum      guma oetherne,
     Hroethgar Beowulf,      and him hael abead,
655  win-aernes geweald      and þaet word acwaeeth:
     "Naefre ic aenegum men      aer alyfde,
     "siethethan ic hond and rond      hebban mihte,
     "þryeth-aern Dena      buton þe nu þa.
     "Hafa nu and geheald      husa selest;
660  "gemyne maeretho,      maegen-ellen cyeth,
     "waca wieth wraethum!      Ne bieth þe wilna gad,
     "gif þu þaet ellen-weorc      aldre gedigest."


XI. THE WATCH FOR GRENDEL.

     Þa him Hroethgar gewat      mid his haeleetha gedryht,
     eodur Scyldinga      ut of healle;
665  wolde wig-fruma      Wealhþeo secan,
     cwen to gebeddan      Haefde kyninga wuldor
     Grendle to-geanes,      swa guman gefrungon,
     sele-weard aseted,      sundor-nytte beheold
     ymb aldor Dena,      eoton weard abead;
670  huru Geata leod      georne truwode
     modgan maegnes,      metodes hyldo.
     Þa he him of dyde      isern-byrnan,
     helm of hafelan,      sealde his hyrsted sweord,
     irena cyst      ombiht-þegne,
675  and gehealdan het      hilde-geatwe.
     Gespraec þa se goda      gylp-worda sum
     Beowulf Geata,      aer he on bed stige:
     "No ic me an here-waesmum      hnagran talige
     "gueth-geweorca,      þonne Grendel hine;
680  "forþan ic hine sweorde      swebban nelle,
     "aldre beneotan,      þeah ic eal maege.
     "Nat he þara goda,      þaet he me on-gean slea,
     "rand geheawe,      þeah þe he rof sie
     "nieth-geweorca;      ac wit on niht sculon
685  "secge ofersittan,      gif he gesecean dear
     "wig ofer waepen,      and siethethan witig god
     "on swa hwaeethere hond      halig dryhten
     "maeretho deme,      swa him gemet þince."
     Hylde hine þa heaetho-deor,      hleor-bolster onfeng
690  eorles andwlitan;      and hine ymb monig
     snellic sae-rinc      sele-reste gebeah.
     Naenig heora þohte      þaet he þanon scolde
     eft eard-lufan      aefre gesecean,
     folc oethethe freo-burh,      þaer he afeded waes,
695  ac hie haefdon gefrunen,      þaet hie aer to fela micles
     in þaem win-sele      wael-deaeth fornam,
     Denigea leode.      Ac him dryhten forgeaf
     wig-speda gewiofu,      Wedera leodum
     frofor and fultum,      þaet hie feond heora
700  þurh anes craeft      ealle ofercomon,
     selfes mihtum:      soeth is gecyethed,
     þaet mihtig god      manna cynnes
     weold wide-ferheth.      Com on wanre niht
     scriethan sceadu-genga.      Sceotend swaefon,
705  þa þaet horn-reced      healdan scoldon,
     ealle buton anum.      Þaet waes yldum cueth,
     þaet hie ne moste,      þa metod nolde,
     se syn-scaetha      under sceadu bregdan;
     ac he waeccende      wraethum on andan
710  bad bolgen-mod      beadwa geþinges.


XII. GRENDEL'S RAID.

     Þa com of more      under mist-hleoethum
     Grendel gongan,      godes yrre baer.
     Mynte se man-scaetha      manna cynnes
     sumne besyrwan      in sele þam hean;
715  wod under wolcnum,      to þaes þe he win-reced,
     gold-sele gumena,      gearwost wisse
     faettum fahne.      Ne waes þaet forma sieth,
     þaet he Hroethgares      ham gesohte:
     naefre he on aldor-dagum      aer ne siethethan
720  heardran haele,      heal-þegnas fand!
     Com þa to recede      rinc siethian
     dreamum bedaeled.      Duru sona onarn
     fyr-bendum faest,      syethethan he hire folmum hran;
     onbraed þa bealo-hydig,      þa he abolgen waes,
725  recedes muethan.      Raethe aefter þon
     on fagne flor      feond treddode,
     eode yrre-mod;      him of eagum stod
     lige gelicost      leoht unfaeger.
     Geseah he in recede      rinca manige,
730  swefan sibbe-gedriht      samod aetgaedere,
     mago-rinca heap:      þa his mod ahlog,
     mynte þaet he gedaelde,      aer þon daeg cwome,
     atol aglaeca,      anra gehwylces
     lif wieth lice,      þa him alumpen waes
735  wist-fylle wen.      Ne waes þaet wyrd þa gen,
     þaet he ma moste      manna cynnes
     þicgean ofer þa niht.      Þryeth-swyeth beheold
     maeg Higelaces,      hu se man-scaetha
     under faer-gripum      gefaran wolde.
740  Ne þaet se aglaeca      yldan þohte,
     ac he gefeng hraethe      forman siethe
     slaependne rinc,      slat unwearnum,
     bat ban-locan,      blod edrum dranc,
     syn-snaedum swealh:      sona haefde
745  unlyfigendes      eal gefeormod
     fet and folma.      Foreth near aetstop,
     nam þa mid handa      hige-þihtigne
     rinc on raeste;      raehte ongean
     feond mid folme,      he onfeng hraethe
750  inwit-þancum      and wieth earm gesaet.
     Sona þaet onfunde      fyrena hyrde,
     þaet he ne mette      middan-geardes
     eorethan sceata      on elran men
     mund-gripe maran:      he on mode weareth
755  forht on ferhethe,      no þy aer fram meahte;
     hyge waes him hin-fus,      wolde on heolster fleon,
     secan deofla gedraeg:      ne waes his drohtoeth þaer,
     swylce he on ealder-dagum      aer gemette.
     Gemunde þa se goda      maeg Higelaces
760  aefen-spraece,      up-lang astod
     and him faeste wiethfeng.      Fingras burston;
     eoten waes ut-weard,      eorl furethur stop.
     Mynte se maera,      þaer he meahte swa,
     widre gewindan      and on weg þanon
765  fleon on fen-hopu;      wiste his fingra geweald
     on grames grapum.      Þaet waes geocor sieth,
     þaet se hearm-scaetha      to Heorute ateah:
     dryht-sele dynede,      Denum eallum weareth,
     ceaster-buendum,      cenra gehwylcum,
770  eorlum ealu-scerwen.      Yrre waeron begen,
     reethe ren-weardas.      Reced hlynsode;
     þa waes wundor micel,      þaet se win-sele
     wiethhaefde heaetho-deorum,      þaet he on hrusan ne feol,
     faeger fold-bold;      ac he þaes faeste waes
775  innan and utan      iren-bendum
     searo-þoncum besmiethod.      Þaer fram sylle abeag
     medu-benc monig      mine gefraege,
     golde geregnad,      þaer þa graman wunnon;
     þaes ne wendon aer      witan Scyldinga,
780  þaet hit a mid gemete      manna aenig
     betlic and ban-fag      tobrecan meahte,
     listum tolucan,      nymethe liges faeethm
     swulge on swaethule.      Sweg up astag
     niwe geneahhe;      Noreth-Denum stod
785  atelic egesa      anra gehwylcum
     þara þe of wealle      wop gehyrdon,
     gryre-leoeth galan      godes andsacan,
     sige-leasne sang,      sar wanigean
     helle haeftan.      Heold hine to faeste
790  se þe manna waes      maegene strengest
     on þaem daege      þysses lifes.


XIII. BEOWULF TEARS OFF GRENDEL'S ARM.

     Nolde eorla hleo      aenige þinga
     þone cwealm-cuman      cwicne forlaetan,
     ne his lif-dagas      leoda aenigum
795  nytte tealde.      Þaer genehost braegd
     eorl Beowulfes      ealde lafe,
     wolde frea-drihtnes      feorh ealgian
     maeres þeodnes,      þaer hie meahton swa;
     hie þaet ne wiston,      þa hie gewin drugon,
800  heard-hicgende      hilde-mecgas,
     and on healfa gehwone      heawan þohton,
     sawle secan,      þaet þone syn-scaethan
     aenig ofer eorethan      irenna cyst,
     gueth-billa nan      gretan nolde;
805  ac he sige-waepnum      forsworen haefde,
     ecga gehwylcre.      Scolde his aldor-gedal
     on þaem daege      þysses lifes
     earmlic wurethan      and se ellor-gast
     on feonda geweald      feor siethian.
810  Þa þaet onfunde      se þe fela aeror
     modes myrethe      manna cynne
     fyrene gefremede      (he waes fag wieth god)
     þaet him se lic-homa      laestan nolde,
     ac hine se modega      maeg Hygelaces
815  haefde be honda;      waes gehwaeether oethrum
     lifigende laeth.      Lic-sar gebad
     atol aeglaeca,      him on eaxle weareth
     syn-dolh sweotol,      seonowe onsprungon
     burston ban-locan.      Beowulfe weareth
820  gueth-hreeth gyfeethe;      scolde Grendel þonan
     feorh-seoc fleon      under fen-hleoethu,
     secean wyn-leas wic;      wiste þe geornor,
     þaet his aldres waes      ende gegongen,
     dogera daeg-rim.      Denum eallum weareth
825  aefter þam wael-raese      willa gelumpen.
     Haefde þa gefaelsod,      se þe aer feorran com,
     snotor and swyeth-ferheth      sele Hroethgares,
     genered wieth niethe.      Niht-weorce gefeh,
     ellen-maerethum;      haefde East-Denum
830  Geat-mecga leod      gilp gelaested,
     swylce oncyethethe      ealle gebette,
     inwid-sorge,      þe hie aer drugon
     and for þrea-nydum      þolian scoldon,
     torn unlytel.      Þaet waes tacen sweotol,
835  syethethan hilde-deor      hond alegde,
     earm and eaxle      (þaer waes eal geador
     Grendles grape)      under geapne hrof.


XIV. THE JOY AT HEOROT.

     Þa waes on morgen      mine gefraege
     ymb þa gif-healle      gueth-rinc monig:
840  ferdon folc-togan      feorran and nean
     geond wid-wegas      wundor sceawian,
     laethes lastas.      No his lif-gedal
     sarlic þuhte      secga aenegum,
     þara þe tir-leases      trode sceawode,
845  hu he werig-mod      on weg þanon,
     nietha ofercumen,      on nicera mere
     faege and geflymed      feorh-lastas baer.
     Þaer waes on blode      brim weallende,
     atol yetha geswing      eal gemenged
850  hatan heolfre,      heoro-dreore weol;
     deaeth-faege deog,      siethethan dreama leas
     in fen-freoetho      feorh alegde
     haeethene sawle,      þaer him hel onfeng.
     Þanon eft gewiton      eald-gesiethas,
855  swylce geong manig      of gomen-waethe,
     fram mere modge,      mearum ridan,
     beornas on blancum.      Þaer waes Beowulfes
     maeretho maened;      monig oft gecwaeeth,
     þaette sueth ne noreth      be saem tweonum
860  ofer eormen-grund      oether naenig
     under swegles begong      selra naere
     rond-haebbendra,      rices wyrethra.
     Ne hie huru wine-drihten      wiht ne logon,
     glaedne Hroethgar,      ac þaet waes god cyning.
865  Hwilum heaetho-rofe      hleapan leton,
     on geflit faran      fealwe mearas,
     þaer him fold-wegas      faegere þuhton,
     cystum cuethe;      hwilum cyninges þegn,
     guma gilp-hlaeden      gidda gemyndig,
870  se þe eal-fela      eald-gesegena
     worn gemunde,      word oether fand
     soethe gebunden:      secg eft ongan
     sieth Beowulfes      snyttrum styrian
     and on sped wrecan      spel gerade,
875  wordum wrixlan,      wel-hwylc gecwaeeth,
     þaet he fram Sigemunde      secgan hyrde,
     ellen-daedum,      uncuethes fela,
     Waelsinges gewin,      wide siethas,
     þara þe gumena bearn      gearwe ne wiston,
880  faehethe and fyrene,      buton Fitela mid hine,
     þonne he swylces hwaet      secgan wolde
     eam his nefan,      swa hie a waeron
     aet nietha gehwam      nyd-gesteallan:
     haefdon eal-fela      eotena cynnes
885  sweordum gesaeged.      Sigemunde gesprong
     aefter deaeth-daege      dom unlytel,
     syethethan wiges heard      wyrm acwealde,
     hordes hyrde;      he under harne stan,
     aeethelinges bearn,      ana geneethde
890  frecne daede;      ne waes him Fitela mid.
     Hwaeethre him gesaelde,      þaet þaet swurd þurhwod
     wraetlicne wyrm,      þaet hit on wealle aetstod,
     dryhtlic iren;      draca morethre swealt.
     Haefde aglaeca      elne gegongen,
895  þaet he beah-hordes      brucan moste
     selfes dome:      sae-bat gehlod,
     baer on bearm scipes      beorhte fraetwa,
     Waelses eafera;      wyrm hat gemealt.
     Se waes wreccena      wide maerost
900  ofer wer-þeode,      wigendra hleo
     ellen-daedum:      he þaes aron þah.
     Siethethan Heremodes      hild sweethrode
     eafoeth and ellen.      He mid eotenum weareth
     on feonda geweald      foreth forlacen,
905  snude forsended.      Hine sorh-wylmas
     lemede to lange,      he his leodum weareth,
     eallum aeethelingum      to aldor-ceare;
     swylce oft bemearn      aerran maelum
     swieth-ferhethes sieth      snotor ceorl monig,
910  se þe him bealwa to      bote gelyfde,
     þaet þaet þeodnes bearn      geþeon scolde,
     faeder-aeethelum onfon,      folc gehealdan,
     hord and hleo-burh,      haeleetha rice,
     eethel Scyldinga.      He þaer eallum weareth,
915  maeg Higelaces      manna cynne,
     freondum gefaegra;      hine fyren onwod.

     Hwilum flitende      fealwe straete
     mearum maeton.      Þa waes morgen-leoht
     scofen and scynded.      Eode scealc monig
920  swieth-hicgende      to sele þam hean,
     searo-wundor seon,      swylce self cyning,
     of bryd-bure      beah-horda weard,
     tryddode tir-faest      getrume micle,
     cystum gecyethed,      and his cwen mid him
925  medo-stig gemaet      maegetha hose.


XV. HROTHGAR'S GRATULATION.

     Hroethgar maethelode      (he to healle geong,
     stod on stapole,      geseah steapne hrof
     golde fahne      and Grendles hond):
     "þisse ansyne      al-wealdan þanc
930  "lungre gelimpe!      Fela ic laethes gebad,
     "grynna aet Grendle:      a maeg god wyrcan
     "wunder aefter wundre,      wuldres hyrde!
     "Þaet waes ungeara,      þaet ic aenigra me
     "weana ne wende      to widan feore
935  "bote gebidan      þonne blode fah
     "husa selest      heoro-dreorig stod;
     "wea wid-scofen      witena gehwylcne
     "þara þe ne wendon,      þaet hie wide-ferheth
     "leoda land-geweorc      laethum beweredon
940  "scuccum and scinnum.      Nu scealc hafaeth
     "þurh drihtnes miht      daed gefremede,
     "þe we ealle      aer ne meahton
     "snyttrum besyrwan.      Hwaet! þaet secgan maeg
     "efne swa hwylc maegetha,      swa þone magan cende
945  "aefter gum-cynnum,      gyf heo gyt lyfaeth,
     "þaet hyre eald-metod      este waere
     "bearn-gebyrdo.      Nu ic Beowulf
     "þec, secg betsta,      me for sunu wylle
     "freogan on ferhethe;      heald foreth tela
950  "niwe sibbe.      Ne bieth þe naenigra gad
     "worolde wilna,      þe ic geweald haebbe.
     "Ful-oft ic for laessan      lean teohhode
     "hord-weorethunge      hnahran rince,
     "saemran aet saecce.      Þu þe self hafast
955  "daedum gefremed,      þaet þin dom lyfaeth
     "awa to aldre.      Alwalda þec
     "gode forgylde,      swa he nu gyt dyde!"
     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
     "We þaet ellen-weorc      estum miclum,
960  "feohtan fremedon,      frecne geneethdon
     "eafoeth uncuethes;      uethe ic swiethor,
     "þaet þu hinc selfne      geseon moste,
     "feond on fraetewum      fyl-werigne!
     "Ic hine hraedlice      heardan clammum
965  "on wael-bedde      wriethan þohte,
     "þaet he for mund-gripe      minum scolde
     "licgean lif-bysig,      butan his lic swice;
     "ic hine ne mihte,      þa metod nolde,
     "ganges getwaeman,      no ic him þaes georne aetfealh,
970  "feorh-geniethlan;      waes to fore-mihtig
     "feond on feethe.      Hwaeethere he his folme forlet
     "to lif-wraethe      last weardian,
     "earm and eaxle;      no þaer aenige swa þeah
     "fea-sceaft guma      frofre gebohte:
975  "no þy leng leofaeth      laeth-geteona
     "synnum geswenced,      ac hyne sar hafaeth
     "in nyd-gripe      nearwe befongen,
     "balwon bendum:      þaer abidan sceal
     "maga mane fah      miclan domes,
980  "hu him scir metod      scrifan wille."
     Þa waes swigra secg,      sunu Ecglafes,
     on gylp-spraece      gueth-geweorca,
     siethethan aeethelingas      eorles craefte
     ofer heahne hrof      hand sceawedon,
985  feondes fingras,      foran aeghwylc;
     waes stede naegla gehwylc,      style gelicost,
     haeethenes hand-sporu      hilde-rinces
     egle unheoru;      aeg-hwylc gecwaeeth,
     þaet him heardra nan      hrinan wolde
990  iren aer-god,      þaet þaes ahlaecan
     blodge beadu-folme      onberan wolde.


XVI. THE BANQUET AND THE GIFTS.

     Þa waes haten hreethe      Heort innan-weard
     folmum gefraetwod:      fela þaera waes
     wera and wifa,      þe þaet win-reced,
995  gest-sele gyredon.      Gold-fag scinon
     web aefter wagum,      wundor-siona fela
     secga gehwylcum      þara þe on swylc staraeth
     Waes þaet beorhte bold      tobrocen swiethe
     eal inne-weard      iren-bendum faest,
1000 heorras tohlidene;      hrof ana genaes
     ealles ansund,      þa se aglaeca
     fyren-daedum fag      on fleam gewand,
     aldres or-wena.      No þaet yethe byeth
     to befleonne      (fremme se þe wille!)
1005 ac gesacan sceal      sawl-berendra
     nyde genydde      niethetha bearna
     grund-buendra      gearwe stowe,
     þaer his lic-homa      leger-bedde faest
     swefeeth aefter symle.      Þa waes sael and mael,
1010 þaet to healle gang      Healfdenes sunu;
     wolde self cyning      symbel þicgan.
     Ne gefraegen ic þa maegethe      maran weorode
     ymb hyra sinc-gyfan      sel gebaeran.
     Bugon þa to bence      blaed-agende,
1015 fylle gefaegon.      Faegere geþaegon
     medo-ful manig      magas + þara
     swieth-hicgende      on sele þam hean,
     Hroethgar and Hroethulf.      Heorot innan waes
     freondum afylled;      nalles facen-stafas
1020 Þeod-Scyldingas      þenden fremedon.
     Forgeaf þa Beowulfe      bearn Healfdenes
     segen gyldenne      sigores to leane,
     hroden hilte-cumbor,      helm and byrnan;
     maere maethethum-sweord      manige gesawon
1025 beforan beorn beran.      Beowulf geþah
     ful on flette;      no he þaere feoh-gyfte
     for sceotendum      scamigan þorfte,
     ne gefraegn ic freondlicor      feower madmas
     golde gegyrede      gum-manna fela
1030 in ealo-bence      oethrum gesellan.
     Ymb þaes helmes hrof      heafod-beorge
     wirum bewunden      walan utan heold,
     þaet him fela lafe      frecne ne meahton
     scur-heard sceethethan,      þonne scyld-freca
1035 ongean gramum      gangan scolde.
     Heht þa eorla hleo      eahta mearas,
     faeted-hleore,      on flet teon
     in under eoderas;      þara anum stod
     sadol searwum fah      since gewurethad,
1040 þaet waes hilde-setl      heah-cyninges,
     þonne sweorda gelac      sunu Healfdenes
     efnan wolde;      naefre on ore laeg
     wid-cuethes wig,      þonne walu feollon.
     And þa Beowulfe      bega gehwaeethres
1045 eodor Ingwina      onweald geteah,
     wicga and waepna;      het hine wel brucan.
     Swa manlice      maere þeoden,
     hord-weard haeleetha      heaetho-raesas geald
     mearum and madmum,      swa hy naefre man lyheth,
1050 se þe secgan wile      soeth aefter rihte.


XVII. SONG OF HROTHGAR'S POET--THE LAY OF HNAEF AND HENGEST.

     Þa gyt aeghwylcum      eorla drihten
     þara þe mid Beowulfe      brim-lade teah,
     on þaere medu-bence      maethethum gesealde,
     yrfe-lafe,      and þone aenne heht
1055 golde forgyldan,      þone þe Grendel aer
     mane acwealde,      swa he hyra ma wolde,
     nefne him witig god      wyrd forstode
     and þaes mannes mod:      metod eallum weold
     gumena cynnes,      swa he nu git deeth;
1060 forþan bieth andgit      aeghwaer selest,
     ferhethes fore-þanc!      fela sceal gebidan
     leofes and laethes,      se þe longe her
     on þyssum win-dagum      worolde bruceeth.
     Þaer waes sang and sweg      samod aetgaedere
1065 fore Healfdenes      hilde-wisan,
     gomen-wudu greted,      gid oft wrecen,
     þonne heal-gamen      Hroethgares scop
     aefter medo-bence      maenan scolde
     Finnes eaferum,      þa hie se faer begeat:
1070 "Haeleeth Healfdenes,      Hnaef Scyldinga,
     "in Fr..es waele      feallan scolde.
     "Ne huru Hildeburh      herian þorfte
     "Eotena treowe:      unsynnum weareth
     "beloren leofum      aet þam lind-plegan
1075 "bearnum and broethrum;      hie on gebyrd hruron
     "gare wunde;      þaet waes geomuru ides.
     "Nalles holinga      Hoces dohtor
     "meotod-sceaft bemearn,      syethethan morgen com,
     "þa heo under swegle      geseon meahte
1080 "morethor-bealo maga,      þaer heo aer maeste heold
     "worolde wynne:      wig ealle fornam
     "Finnes þegnas,      nemne feaum anum,
     "þaet he ne mehte      on þaem meethel-stede
     "wig Hengeste      wiht gefeohtan,
1085 "ne þa wea-lafe      wige forþringan
     "þeodnes þegne;       ac hig him geþingo budon,
     "þaet hie him oether flet      eal gerymdon,
     "healle and heah-setl,      þaet hie healfre geweald
     "wieth Eotena bearn      agan moston,
1090 "and aet feoh-gyftum      Folcwaldan sunu
     "dogra gehwylce      Dene weorethode,
     "Hengestes heap      hringum wenede,
     "efne swa swiethe      sinc-gestreonum
     "faettan goldes,      swa he Fresena cyn
1095 "on beor-sele      byldan wolde.
     "Þa hie getruwedon      on twa healfa
     "faeste frioethu-waere;      Fin Hengeste
     "elne unflitme      aethum benemde,
     "þaet he þa wea-lafe      weotena dome
1100 "arum heolde,      þaet þaer aenig mon
     "wordum ne worcum      waere ne braece,
     "ne þurh inwit-searo      aefre gemaenden,
     "þeah hie hira beag-gyfan      banan folgedon
     "þeoden-lease,      þa him swa geþearfod waes:
1105 "gyf þonne Frysna hwylc      frecnan spraece
     "þaes morethor-hetes      myndgiend waere,
     "þonne hit sweordes ecg      syethethan scolde.
     "Aeth waes geaefned      and icge gold
     "ahaefen of horde.      Here-Scyldinga
1110 "betst beado-rinca      waes on bael gearu;
     "aet þaem ade waes      eeth-gesyne
     "swat-fah syrce,      swyn eal-gylden,
     "eofer iren-heard,      aeetheling manig
     "wundum awyrded;      sume on waele crungon.
1115 "Het þa Hildeburh      aet Hnaefes ade
     "hire selfre sunu      sweoloethe befaestan,
     "ban-fatu baernan      and on bael don.
     "Earme on eaxle      ides gnornode,
     "geomrode giddum;      gueth-rinc astah.
1120 "Wand to wolcnum      wael-fyra maest,
     "hlynode for hlawe;      hafelan multon,
     "ben-geato burston,      þonne blod aetspranc
     "laeth-bite lices.      Lig ealle forswealg,
     "gaesta gifrost,      þara þe þaer gueth fornam
1125 "bega folces;      waes hira blaed scacen.


XVIII. THE GLEEMAN'S TALE IS ENDED.

     "Gewiton him þa wigend      wica neosian,
     "freondum befeallen      Frysland geseon,
     "hamas and hea-burh.      Hengest þa gyt
     "wael-fagne winter      wunode mid Finne
1130 "ealles unhlitme;      eard gemunde,
     "þeah þe he ne meahte      on mere drifan
     "hringed-stefnan;      holm storme weol,
     "won wieth winde;      winter yethe beleac
     "is-gebinde      oeth þaet oether com
1135 "gear in geardas,      swa nu gyt deeth,
     "þa þe syngales      sele bewitiaeth,
     "wuldor-torhtan weder.      Þa waes winter scacen,
     "faeger foldan bearm;      fundode wrecca,
     "gist of geardum;      he to gyrn-wraece
1140 "swiethor þohte,      þonne to sae-lade,
     "gif he torn-gemot      þurhteon mihte,
     "þaet he Eotena bearn      inne gemunde.
     "Swa he ne forwyrnde      worold-raedenne,
     "þonne him Hunlafing      hilde-leoman,
1145 "billa selest,      on bearm dyde:
     "þaes waeron mid Eotenum      ecge cuethe.
     "Swylce ferheth-frecan      Fin eft begeat
     "sweord-bealo sliethen      aet his selfes ham,
     "siethethan grimne gripe      Guethlaf ond Oslaf
1150 "aefter sae-siethe      sorge maendon,
     "aetwiton weana dael;      ne meahte waefre mod
     "forhabban in hreethre.      Þa waes heal hroden
     "feonda feorum,      swilce Fin slaegen,
     "cyning on corethre,      and seo cwen numen.
1155 "Sceotend Scyldinga      to scypum feredon
     "eal in-gesteald      eoreth-cyninges,
     "swylce hie aet Finnes ham      findan meahton
     "sigla searo-gimma.      Hie on sae-lade
     "drihtlice wif      to Denum feredon,
1160 "laeddon to leodum."      Leoeth waes asungen,
     gleo-mannes gyd.      Gamen eft astah,
     beorhtode benc-sweg,      byrelas sealdon
     win of wunder-fatum.      Þa cwom Wealhþeo foreth
     gan under gyldnum beage,      þaer þa godan twegen
1165 saeton suhter-gefaederan;      þa gyt waes hiera sib aetgaedere
     aeghwylc oethrum trywe.      Swylce þaer Unfereth þyle
     aet fotum saet frean Scyldinga:      gehwylc hiora his ferhethe treowde,
     þaet he haefde mod micel,      þeah þe he his magum naere
     arfaest aet ecga gelacum.      Spraec þa ides Scyldinga:
1170 "Onfoh þissum fulle,      freo-drihten min,
     "sinces brytta;      þu on saelum wes,
     "gold-wine gumena,      and to Geatum sprec
     "mildum wordum!      Swa sceal man don.
     "Beo wieth Geatas glaed,      geofena gemyndig;
1175 "nean and feorran      þu nu friethu hafast.
     "Me man saegde,      þaet þu þe for sunu wolde
     "here-rinc habban.      Heorot is gefaelsod,
     "beah-sele beorhta;      bruc þenden þu mote
     "manigra meda      and þinum magum laef
1180 "folc and rice,      þonne þu foreth scyle
     "metod-sceaft seon.      Ic minne can
     "glaedne Hroethulf,      þaet he þa geogoethe wile
     "arum healdan,      gyf þu aer þonne he,
     "wine Scildinga,      worold oflaetest;
1185 "wene ic, þaet he mid gode      gyldan wille
     "uncran eaferan,      gif he þaet eal gemon,
     "hwaet wit to willan      and to woreth-myndum
     "umbor wesendum aer      arna gefremedon."
     Hwearf þa bi bence,      þaer hyre byre waeron,
1190 Hreethric and Hroethmund,      and haeleetha bearn,
     giogoeth aetgaedere;      þaer se goda saet
     Beowulf Geata      be þaem gebroethrum twaem.


XIX. BEOWULF'S JEWELLED COLLAR. THE HEROES REST.

     Him waes ful boren      and freond-laethu
     wordum bewaegned      and wunden gold
1195 estum geeawed,      earm-hreade twa,
     hraegl and hringas,      heals-beaga maest
     þara þe ic on foldan      gefraegen haebbe.
     Naenigne ic under swegle      selran hyrde
     hord-maethethum haeleetha,      syethethan Hama aetwaeg
1200 to þaere byrhtan byrig      Brosinga mene,
     sigle and sinc-faet,      searo-niethas fealh
     Eormenrices,      geceas ecne raed.
     Þone hring haefde      Higelac Geata,
     nefa Swertinges,      nyhstan siethe,
1205 siethethan he under segne      sinc ealgode,
     wael-reaf werede;      hyne Wyrd fornam,
     syethethan he for wlenco      wean ahsode,
     faehethe to Frysum;      he þa fraetwe waeg,
     eorclan-stanas      ofer yetha ful,
1210 rice þeoden,      he under rande gecranc;
     gehwearf þa in Francna faeethm      feorh cyninges,
     breost-gewaedu      and se beah somod:
     wyrsan wig-frecan      wael reafedon
     aefter gueth-sceare,      Geata leode
1215 hrea-wic heoldon.      Heal swege onfeng.
     Wealhþeo maethelode,      heo fore þaem werede spraec:
     "Bruc þisses beages,      Beowulf, leofa
     "hyse, mid haele,      and þisses hraegles neot
     "þeod-gestreona,      and geþeoh tela,
1220 "cen þec mid craefte      and þyssum cnyhtum wes
     "lara liethe!      ic þe þaes lean geman.
     "Hafast þu gefered,      þaet þe feor and neah
     "ealne wide-ferheth      weras ehtigaeth,
     "efne swa side      swa sae bebugeeth
1225 "windige weallas.      Wes, þenden þu lifige,
     "aeetheling eadig!      ic þe an tela
     "sinc-gestreona.      Beo þu suna minum
     "daedum gedefe      dream healdende!
     "Her is aeghwylc eorl      oethrum getrywe,
1230 "modes milde,      man-drihtne hold,
     "þegnas syndon geþwaere,      þeod eal gearo:
     "druncne dryht-guman,      doeth swa ic bidde!"
     Eode þa to setle.      Þaer waes symbla cyst,
     druncon win weras:      wyrd ne cuethon,
1235 geo-sceaft grimme,      swa hit agangen weareth
     eorla manegum,      syethethan aefen cwom
     and him Hroethgar gewat      to hofe sinum,
     rice to raeste.      Reced weardode
     unrim eorla,      swa hie oft aer dydon:
1240 benc-þelu beredon,      hit geond-braeded weareth
     beddum and bolstrum.      Beor-scealca sum
     fus and faege      flet-raeste gebeag.
     Setton him to heafdum      hilde-randas,
     bord-wudu beorhtan;      þaer on bence waes
1245 ofer aeethelinge      yeth-gesene
     heaetho-steapa helm,      hringed byrne,
     þrec-wudu þrymlic.      Waes þeaw hyra,
     þaet hie oft waeron      an wig gearwe,
     ge aet ham ge on herge,      ge gehwaeether þara
1250 efne swylce maela,      swylce hira man-dryhtne
     þearf gesaelde;      waes seo þeod tilu.


XX. GRENDEL'S MOTHER ATTACKS THE RING-DANES.

     Sigon þa to slaepe.      Sum sare angeald
     aefen-raeste,      swa him ful-oft gelamp,
     siethethan gold-sele      Grendel warode,
1255 unriht aefnde,      oeth þaet ende becwom,
     swylt aefter synnum.      Þaet gesyne weareth,
     wid-cueth werum,      þaette wrecend þa gyt
     lifde aefter laethum,      lange þrage
     aefter gueth-ceare;      Grendles modor,
1260 ides aglaec-wif      yrmethe gemunde,
     se þe waeter-egesan      wunian scolde,
     cealde streamas,      siethethan Cain weareth
     to ecg-banan      angan breether,
     faederen-maege;      he þa fag gewat,
1265 morethre gemearcod      man-dream fleon,
     westen warode.      Þanon woc fela
     geosceaft-gasta;      waes þaera Grendel sum,
     heoro-wearh hetelic,      se aet Heorote fand
     waeccendne wer      wiges bidan,
1270 þaer him aglaeca      aet-graepe weareth;
     hwaeethre he gemunde      maegenes strenge,
     gim-faeste gife,      þe him god sealde,
     and him to anwaldan      are gelyfde,
     frofre and fultum:      þy he þone feond ofercwom,
1275 gehnaegde helle gast:      þa he hean gewat,
     dreame bedaeled      deaeth-wic seon,
     man-cynnes feond.      And his modor þa gyt
     gifre and galg-mod      gegan wolde
     sorh-fulne sieth,      suna deaeth wrecan.
1280 Com þa to Heorote,      þaer Hring-Dene
     geond þaet saeld swaefun.      Þa þaer sona weareth
     ed-hwyrft eorlum,      siethethan inne fealh
     Grendles modor;      waes se gryre laessa
     efne swa micle,      swa bieth maegetha craeft,
1285 wig-gryre wifes      be waepned-men,
     þonne heoru bunden,      hamere geþuren,
     sweord swate fah      swin ofer helme,
     ecgum dyhtig      andweard scireeth.
     Þa waes on healle      heard-ecg togen,
1290 sweord ofer setlum,      sid-rand manig
     hafen handa faest;      helm ne gemunde,
     byrnan side,      þe hine se broga angeat.
     Heo waes on ofste,      wolde ut þanon
     feore beorgan,      þa heo onfunden waes;
1295 hraethe heo aeethelinga      anne haefde
     faeste befangen,      þa heo to fenne gang;
     se waes Hroethgare      haeleetha leofost
     on gesiethes had      be saem tweonum,
     rice rand-wiga,      þone þe heo on raeste abreat,
1300 blaed-faestne beorn.      Naes Beowulf þaer,
     ac waes oether in      aer geteohhod
     aefter maethethum-gife      maerum Geate.
     Hream weareth on Heorote.      Heo under heolfre genam
     cuethe folme;      cearu waes geniwod
1305 geworden in wicum:      ne waes þaet gewrixle til,
     þaet hie on ba healfa      bicgan scoldon
     freonda feorum.      Þa waes frod cyning,
     har hilde-rinc,      on hreon mode,
     syethethan he aldor-þegn      unlyfigendne,
1310 þone deorestan      deadne wisse.
     Hraethe waes to bure      Beowulf fetod,
     sigor-eadig secg.      Samod aer-daege
     eode eorla sum,      aeethele cempa
     self mid gesiethum,      þaer se snottra bad,
1315 hwaeethre him al-walda      aefre wille
     aefter wea-spelle      wyrpe gefremman.
     Gang þa aefter flore      fyrd-wyrethe man
     mid his hand-scale      (heal-wudu dynede)
     þaet he þone wisan      wordum hnaegde
1320 frean Ingwina;      fraegn gif him waere
     aefter neod-laethu      niht getaese.


XXI. SORROW AT HEOROT: AESCHERE'S DEATH.

     Hroethgar maethelode,      helm Scildinga:
     "Ne frin þu aefter saelum!      Sorh is geniwod
     "Denigea leodum.      Dead is Aesc-here,
1325 "Yrmenlafes      yldra broethor,
     "min run-wita      and min raed-bora,
     "eaxl-gestealla,      þonne we on orlege
     "hafelan weredon,      þonne hniton feethan,
     "eoferas cnysedan;      swylc scolde eorl wesan
1330 "aeetheling aer-god,      swylc Aesc-here waes.
     "Weareth him on Heorote      to hand-banan
     "wael-gaest waefre;      ic ne wat hwaeder
     "atol aese wlanc      eft-siethas teah,
     "fylle gefraegnod.      Heo þa faehethe wraec,
1335 "þe þu gystran niht      Grendel cwealdest
     "þurh haestne had      heardum clammum,
     "forþan he to lange      leode mine
     "wanode and wyrde.      He aet wige gecrang
     "ealdres scyldig,      and nu oether cwom
1340 "mihtig man-scaetha,      wolde hyre maeg wrecan,
     "ge feor hafaeth      faehethe gestaeled,
     "þaes þe þincean maeg      þegne monegum,
     "se þe aefter sinc-gyfan      on sefan greoteeth,
     "hreether-bealo hearde;      nu seo hand ligeeth,
1345 "se þe eow wel-hwylcra      wilna dohte.
     "Ic þaet lond-buend      leode mine
     "sele-raedende      secgan hyrde,
     "þaet hie gesawon      swylce twegen
     "micle mearc-stapan      moras healdan,
1350 "ellor-gaestas:      þaera oether waes,
     "þaes þe hie gewislicost      gewitan meahton,
     "idese onlicnes,      oether earm-sceapen
     "on weres waestmum      wraec-lastas traed,
     "naefne he waes mara      þonne aenig man oether,
1355 "þone on gear-dagum      Grendel nemdon
     "fold-buende:      no hie faeder cunnon,
     "hwaeether him aenig waes      aer acenned
     "dyrnra gasta.      Hie dygel lond
     "warigeaeth, wulf-hleoethu,      windige naessas,
1360 "frecne fen-gelad,      þaer fyrgen-stream
     "under naessa genipu      niether gewiteeth,
     "flod under foldan;      nis þaet feor heonon
     "mil-gemearces,      þaet se mere standeeth,
     "ofer þaem hongiaeth      hrimge bearwas,
1365 "wudu wyrtum faest,      waeter oferhelmaeth.
     "Þaer maeg nihta gehwaem      nieth-wundor seon,
     "fyr on flode;      no þaes frod leofaeth
     "gumena bearna,      þaet þone grund wite;
     "þeah þe haeeth-stapa      hundum geswenced,
1370 "heorot hornum trum      holt-wudu sece,
     "feorran geflymed,      aer he feorh seleeth,
     "aldor on ofre,      aer he in wille,
     "hafelan hydan.      Nis þaet heoru stow:
     "þonon yeth-geblond      up astigeeth
1375 "won to wolcnum,      þonne wind styreeth
     "laeth gewidru,      oeth þaet lyft drysmaeth,
     "roderas reotaeth.      Nu is raed gelang
     "eft aet þe anum!      Eard git ne const,
     "frecne stowe,      þaer þu findan miht
1380 "sinnigne secg:      sec gif þu dyrre!
     "Ic þe þa faehethe      feo leanige,
     "eald-gestreonum,      swa ic aer dyde,
     "wundnum golde,      gyf þu on weg cymest."


XXII. BEOWULF SEEKS THE MONSTER IN THE HAUNTS OF THE NIXIES.

     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
1385 "Ne sorga, snotor guma!      selre bieth aeghwaem,
     "þaet he his freond wrece,      þonne he fela murne;
     "ure aeghwylc sceal      ende gebidan
     "worolde lifes;      wyrce se þe mote
     "domes aer deaethe!      þaet bieth driht-guman
1390 "unlifgendum      aefter selest.
     "Aris, rices weard;      uton hraethe feran,
     "Grendles magan      gang sceawigan!
     "Ic hit þe gehate:      no he on helm losaeth,
     "ne on foldan faeethm,      ne on fyrgen-holt,
1395 "ne on gyfenes grund,      ga þaer he wille.
     "Þys dogor þu      geþyld hafa
     "weana gehwylces,      swa ic þe wene to!"
     Ahleop þa se gomela,      gode þancode,
     mihtigan drihtne,      þaes se man gespraec.
1400 Þa waes Hroethgare      hors gebaeted,
     wicg wunden-feax.      Wisa fengel
     geatolic gengde;      gum-feetha stop
     lind-haebbendra.      Lastas waeron
     aefter wald-swaethum      wide gesyne,
1405 gang ofer grundas;      gegnum for þa
     ofer myrcan mor,      mago-þegna baer
     þone selestan      sawol-leasne,
     þara þe mid Hroethgare      ham eahtode.
     Ofer-eode þa      aeethelinga bearn
1410 steap stan-hlietho,      stige nearwe,
     enge an-paethas,      un-cueth gelad,
     neowle naessas,      nicor-husa fela;
     he feara sum      beforan gengde
     wisra monna,      wong sceawian,
1415 oeth þaet he faeringa      fyrgen-beamas
     ofer harne stan      hleonian funde,
     wyn-leasne wudu;      waeter under stod
     dreorig and gedrefed.      Denum eallum waes,
     winum Scyldinga,      weorce on mode,
1420 to geþolianne      þegne monegum,
     oncyeth eorla gehwaem,      syethethan Aesc-heres
     on þam holm-clife      hafelan metton.
     Flod blode weol      (folc to saegon)
     hatan heolfre.      Horn stundum song
1425 fuslic fyrd-leoeth.      Feetha eal gesaet;
     gesawon þa aefter waetere      wyrm-cynnes fela,
     sellice sae-dracan      sund cunnian,
     swylce on naes-hleoethum      nicras licgean,
     þa on undern-mael      oft bewitigaeth
1430 sorh-fulne sieth      on segl-rade,
     wyrmas and wil-deor;      hie on weg hruron
     bitere and gebolgne,      bearhtm ongeaton,
     gueth-horn galan.      Sumne Geata leod
     of flan-bogan      feores getwaefde,
1435 yeth-gewinnes,      þaet him on aldre stod
     here-strael hearda;      he on holme waes
     sundes þe saenra,      þe hyne swylt fornam.
     Hraeethe weareth on yethum      mid eofer-spreotum
     heoro-hocyhtum      hearde genearwod,
1440 nietha genaeged      and on naes togen
     wundorlic waeg-bora;      weras sceawedon
     gryrelicne gist.      Gyrede hine Beowulf
     eorl-gewaedum,      nalles for ealdre mearn:
     scolde here-byrne      hondum gebroden,
1445 sid and searo-fah,      sund cunnian,
     seo þe ban-cofan      beorgan cuethe,
     þaet him hilde-grap      hreethre ne mihte,
     eorres inwit-feng,      aldre gesceethethan;
     ac se hwita helm      hafelan werede,
1450 se þe mere-grundas      mengan scolde,
     secan sund-gebland      since geweorethad,
     befongen frea-wrasnum,      swa hine fyrn-dagum
     worhte waepna smieth,      wundrum teode,
     besette swin-licum,      þaet hine syethethan no
1455 brond ne beado-mecas      bitan ne meahton.
     Naes þaet þonne maetost      maegen-fultuma,
     þaet him on þearfe lah      þyle Hroethgares;
     waes þaem haeft-mece      Hrunting nama,
     þaet waes an foran      eald-gestreona;
1460 ecg waes iren      ater-tearum fah,
     ahyrded heaetho-swate;      naefre hit aet hilde ne swac
     manna aengum      þara þe hit mid mundum bewand,
     se þe gryre-siethas      gegan dorste,
     folc-stede fara;      naes þaet forma sieth,
1465 þaet hit ellen-weorc      aefnan scolde.
     Huru ne gemunde      mago Ecglafes
     eafoethes craeftig,      þaet he aer gespraec
     wine druncen,      þa he þaes waepnes onlah
     selran sweord-frecan:      selfa ne dorste
1470 under yetha gewin      aldre geneethan,
     driht-scype dreogan;      þaer he dome forleas,
     ellen-maerethum.      Ne waes þaem oethrum swa,
     syethethan he hine to guethe      gegyred haefde.


XXIII. THE BATTLE WITH THE WATER-DRAKE.

     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
1475 "geþenc nu, se maera      maga Healfdenes,
     "snottra fengel,      nu ic eom siethes fus,
     "gold-wine gumena,      hwaet wit geo spraecon,
     "gif ic aet þearfe      þinre scolde
     "aldre linnan,      þaet þu me a waere
1480 "foreth-gewitenum      on faeder staele;
     "wes þu mund-bora minum      mago-þegnum,
     "hond-gesellum,      gif mec hild nime:
     "swylce þu þa madmas,      þe þu me sealdest,
     "Hroethgar leofa,      Higelace onsend.
1485 "Maeg þonne on þaem golde ongitan      Geata dryhten,
     "geseon sunu Hreethles,      þonne he on þaet sinc staraeth,
     "þaet ic gum-cystum      godne funde
     "beaga bryttan,      breac þonne moste.
     "And þu Unfereth laet      ealde lafe,
1490 "wraetlic waeg-sweord      wid-cuethne man
     "heard-ecg habban;      ic me mid Hruntinge
     "dom gewyrce,      oethethe mec deaeth nimeeth."
     Aefter þaem wordum      Weder-Geata leod
     efste mid elne,      nalas andsware
1495 bidan wolde;      brim-wylm onfeng
     hilde-rince.      Þa waes hwil daeges,
     aer he þone grund-wong      ongytan mehte.
     Sona þaet onfunde,      se þe floda begong
     heoro-gifre beheold      hund missera,
1500 grim and graedig,      þaet þaer gumena sum
     ael-wihta eard      ufan cunnode.
     Grap þa togeanes,      gueth-rinc gefeng
     atolan clommum;      no þy aer in gescod
     halan lice:      hring utan ymb-bearh,
1505 þaet heo þone fyrd-hom      þurh-fon ne mihte,
     locene leoetho-syrcan      laethan fingrum.
     Baer þa seo brim-wylf,      þa heo to botme com,
     hringa þengel      to hofe sinum,
     swa he ne mihte no      (he þaes modig waes)
1510 waepna gewealdan,      ac hine wundra þaes fela
     swencte on sunde,      sae-deor monig
     hilde-tuxum      here-syrcan braec,
     ehton aglaecan.      Þa se eorl ongeat,
     þaet he in nieth-sele      nat-hwylcum waes,
1515 þaer him naenig waeter      wihte ne sceethede,
     ne him for hrof-sele      hrinan ne mehte
     faer-gripe flodes:      fyr-leoht geseah,
     blacne leoman      beorhte scinan.
     Ongeat þa se goda      grund-wyrgenne,
1520 mere-wif mihtig;      maegen-raes forgeaf
     hilde-bille,      hond swenge ne ofteah,
     þaet hire on hafelan      hring-mael agol
     graedig gueth-leoeth.      Þa se gist onfand,
     þaet se beado-leoma      bitan nolde,
1525 aldre sceethethan,      ac seo ecg geswac
     þeodne aet þearfe:      þolode aer fela
     hond-gemota,      helm oft gescaer,
     faeges fyrd-hraegl:      þaet waes forma sieth
     deorum maethme,      þaet his dom alaeg.
1530 Eft waes an-raed,      nalas elnes laet,
     maeretha gemyndig      maeg Hygelaces;
     wearp þa wunden-mael      wraettum gebunden
     yrre oretta,      þaet hit on eorethan laeg,
     stieth and styl-ecg;      strenge getruwode,
1535 mund-gripe maegenes.      Swa sceal man don,
     þonne he aet guethe      gegan þenceeth
     longsumne lof,      na ymb his lif cearaeth.
     Gefeng þa be eaxle      (nalas for faehethe mearn)
     Gueth-Geata leod      Grendles modor;
1540 braegd þa beadwe heard,      þa he gebolgen waes,
     feorh-geniethlan,      þaet heo on flet gebeah.
     Heo him eft hraethe      and-lean forgeald
     grimman grapum      and him togeanes feng;
     oferwearp þa werig-mod      wigena strengest,
1545 feethe-cempa,      þaet he on fylle weareth.
     Ofsaet þa þone sele-gyst      and hyre seaxe geteah,
     brad and brun-ecg      wolde hire bearn wrecan,
     angan eaferan.      Him on eaxle laeg
     breost-net broden;      þaet gebearh feore,
1550 wieth ord and wieth ecge      ingang forstod.
     Haefde þa forsiethod      sunu Ecgþeowes
     under gynne grund,      Geata cempa,
     nemne him heaetho-byrne      helpe gefremede,
     here-net hearde,      and halig god
1555 geweold wig-sigor,      witig drihten;
     rodera raedend      hit on ryht gesced,
     yethelice      syethethan he eft astod.


XXIV. BEOWULF SLAYS THE SPRITE.

     Geseah þa on searwum      sige-eadig bil,
     eald sweord eotenisc      ecgum þyhtig,
1560 wigena weoreth-mynd:      þaet waes waepna cyst,
     buton hit waes mare      þonne aenig mon oether
     to beadu-lace      aetberan meahte
     god and geatolic      giganta geweorc.
     He gefeng þa fetel-hilt,      freca Scildinga,
1565 hreoh and heoro-grim      hring-mael gebraegd,
     aldres orwena,      yrringa sloh,
     þaet hire wieth halse      heard grapode,
     ban-hringas braec,      bil eal þurh-wod
     faegne flaesc-homan,      heo on flet gecrong;
1570 sweord waes swatig,      secg weorce gefeh.
     Lixte se leoma,      leoht inne stod,
     efne swa of hefene      hadre scineeth
     rodores candel.      He aefter recede wlat,
     hwearf þa be wealle,      waepen hafenade
1575 heard be hiltum      Higelaces þegn,
     yrre and an-raed.      Naes seo ecg fracod
     hilde-rince,      ac he hraethe wolde
     Grendle forgyldan      gueth-raesa fela
     þara þe he geworhte      to West-Denum
1580 oftor micle      þonne on aenne sieth,
     þonne he Hroethgares      heoreth-geneatas
     sloh on sweofote,      slaepende fraet
     folces Denigea      fyf-tyne men
     and oether swylc      ut of-ferede,
1585 laethlicu lac.      He him þaes lean forgeald,
     reethe cempa,      to þaes þe he on raeste geseah
     gueth-werigne      Grendel licgan,
     aldor-leasne,      swa him aer gescod
     hild aet Heorote;      hra wide sprong,
1590 syethethan he aefter deaethe      drepe þrowade,
     heoro-sweng heardne,      and hine þa heafde becearf,
     Sona þaet gesawon      snottre ceorlas,
     þa þe mid Hroethgare      on holm wliton,
     þaet waes yeth-geblond      eal gemenged,
1595 brim blode fah:      blonden-feaxe
     gomele ymb godne      ongeador spraecon,
     þaet hig þaes aeethelinges      eft ne wendon,
     þaet he sige-hreethig      secean come
     maerne þeoden;      þa þaes monige geweareth,
1600 þaet hine seo brim-wylf      abroten haefde.
     Þa com non daeges.      Naes ofgeafon
     hwate Scyldingas; gewat him ham þonon
     gold-wine gumena.      Gistas setan,
     modes seoce,      and on mere staredon,
1605 wiston and ne wendon,      þaet hie heora wine-drihten
     selfne gesawon.      Þa þaet sweord ongan
     aefter heaetho-swate      hilde-gicelum
     wig-bil wanian;      þaet waes wundra sum,
     þaet hit eal gemealt      ise gelicost,
1610 þonne forstes bend      faeder onlaeteeth,
     onwindeeth wael-rapas,      se þe geweald hafaeth
     saela and maela;      þaet is soeth metod.
     Ne nom he in þaem wicum,      Weder-Geata leod,
     maethm-aehta ma,      þeh he þaer monige geseah,
1615 buton þone hafelan      and þa hilt somod,
     since fage;      sweord aer gemealt,
     forbarn broden mael:      waes þaet blod to þaes hat,
     aettren ellor-gaest,      se þaer inne swealt.
     Sona waes on sunde,      se þe aer aet saecce gebad
1620 wig-hryre wraethra,      waeter up þurh-deaf;
     waeron yeth-gebland      eal gefaelsod,
     eacne eardas,      þa se ellor-gast
     oflet lif-dagas      and þas laenan gesceaft.
     Com þa to lande      lid-manna helm
1625 swieth-mod swymman,      sae-lace gefeah,
     maegen-byrethenne      þara þe he him mid haefde.
     Eodon him þa togeanes,      gode þancodon,
     þryethlic þegna heap,      þeodnes gefegon,
     þaes þe hi hyne gesundne      geseon moston.
1630 Þa waes of þaem hroran      helm and byrne
     lungre alysed:      lagu drusade,
     waeter under wolcnum,      wael-dreore fag.
     Ferdon foreth þonon      feethe-lastum
     ferhethum faegne,      fold-weg maeton,
1635 cuethe straete;      cyning-balde men
     from þaem holm-clife      hafelan baeron
     earfoethlice      heora aeghwaeethrum
     fela-modigra:      feower scoldon
     on ethaem wael-stenge      weorcum geferian
1640 to þaem gold-sele      Grendles heafod,
     oeth þaet semninga      to sele comon
     frome fyrd-hwate      feower-tyne
     Geata gongan;      gum-dryhten mid
     modig on gemonge      meodo-wongas traed.
1645 Þa com in gan      ealdor þegna,
     daed-cene mon      dome gewurethad,
     haele hilde-deor.      Hroethgar gretan:
     Þa waes be feaxe      on flet boren
     Grendles heafod,      þaer guman druncon,
1650 egeslic for eorlum      and þaere idese mid:
     wlite-seon wraetlic      weras onsawon.


XXV. HROTHGAR'S GRATITUDE: HE DISCOURSES.

     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
     "Hwaet! we þe þas sae-lac,      sunu Healfdenes,
     "leod Scyldinga,      lustum brohton,
1655 "tires to tacne,      þe þu her to locast.
     "Ic þaet unsofte      ealdre gedigde:
     "wige under waetere      weorc geneethde
     "earfoethlice,      aet-rihte waes
     "gueth getwaefed,      nymethe mec god scylde.
1660 "Ne meahte ic aet hilde      mid Hruntinge
     "wiht gewyrcan,      þeah þaet waepen duge,
     "ac me geuethe      ylda waldend,
     "þaet ic on wage geseah      wlitig hangian
     "eald sweord eacen      (oftost wisode
1665 "winigea leasum)      þaet ic þy waepne gebraed.
     "Ofsloh þa aet þaere saecce      (þa me sael ageald)
     "huses hyrdas.      Þa þaet hilde-bil
     "forbarn, brogden mael,      swa þaet blod gesprang,
     "hatost heaetho-swata:      ic þaet hilt þanan
1670 "feondum aetferede;      fyren-daeda wraec,
     "deaeth-cwealm Denigea,      swa hit gedefe waes.
     "Ic hit þe þonne gehate,      þaet þu on Heorote most
     "sorh-leas swefan      mid þinra secga gedryht,
     "and þegna gehwylc      þinra leoda,
1675 "duguethe and iogoethe,      þaet þu him ondraedan ne þearft,
     "þeoden Scyldinga,      on þa healfe,
     "aldor-bealu eorlum,      swa þu aer dydest."
     Þa waes gylden hilt      gamelum rince.
     harum hild-fruman,      on hand gyfen,
1680 enta aer-geweorc,      hit on aeht gehwearf
     aefter deofla hryre      Denigea frean,
     wundor-smietha geweorc,      and þa þas worold ofgeaf
     grom-heort guma,      godes andsaca,
     morethres scyldig,      and his modor eac;
1685 on geweald gehwearf      worold-cyninga
     þaem selestan      be saem tweonum
     þara þe on Sceden-igge      sceattas daelde.
     Hroethgar maethelode,      hylt sceawode,
     ealde lafe,      on þaem waes or writen
1690 fyrn-gewinnes:      syethethan flod ofsloh,
     gifen geotende,      giganta cyn,
     frecne geferdon:      þaet waes fremde þeod
     ecean dryhtne,      him þaes ende-lean
     þurh waeteres wylm      waldend sealde.
1695 Swa waes on þaem scennum      sciran goldes
     þurh run-stafas      rihte gemearcod,
     geseted and gesaed,      hwam þaet sweord geworht,
     irena cyst      aerest waere,
     wreoethen-hilt and wyrm-fah.      Þa se wisa spraec
1700 sunu Healfdenes      (swigedon ealle):
     "Þaet la maeg secgan,      se þe soeth and riht
     "fremeeth on folce,      (feor eal gemon
     "eald eethel-weard),      þaet þes eorl waere
     "geboren betera!      Blaed is araered
1705 "geond wid-wegas,      wine min Beowulf,
     "þin ofer þeoda gehwylce.      Eal þu hit geþyldum healdest,
     "maegen mid modes snyttrum.      Ic þe sceal mine gelaestan
     "freode, swa wit furethum spraecon;      þu scealt to frofre weorethan
     "eal lang-twidig      leodum þinum,
1710 "haeleethum to helpe.      Ne weareth Heremod swa
     "eaforum Ecgwelan,      Ar-Scyldingum;
     "ne geweox he him to willan,      ac to wael-fealle
     "and to deaeth-cwalum      Deniga leodum;
     "breat bolgen-mod      beod-geneatas,
1715 "eaxl-gesteallan,      oeth þaet he ana hwearf,
     "maere þeoden.      mon-dreamum from:
     "þeah þe hine mihtig god      maegenes wynnum,
     "eafeethum stepte,      ofer ealle men
     "foreth gefremede,      hwaeethere him on ferhethe greow
1720 "breost-hord blod-reow:      nallas beagas geaf
     "Denum aefter dome;      dream-leas gebad,
     "þaet he þaes gewinnes      weorc þrowade,
     "leod-bealo longsum.      Þu þe laer be þon,
     "gum-cyste ongit!      ic þis gid be þe
1725 "awraec wintrum frod.      Wundor is to secganne,
     "hu mihtig god      manna cynne
     "þurh sidne sefan      snyttru bryttaeth,
     "eard and eorl-scipe,      he ah ealra geweald.
     "Hwilum he on lufan      laeteeth hworfan
1730 "monnes mod-geþonc      maeran cynnes,
     "seleeth him on eethle      eorethan wynne,
     "to healdanne      hleo-burh wera,
     "gedeeth him swa gewealdene      worolde daelas,
     "side rice,      þaet he his selfa ne maeg
1735 "for his un-snyttrum      ende geþencean;
     "wunaeth he on wiste,      no hine wiht dweleeth,
     "adl ne yldo,      ne him inwit-sorh
     "on sefan sweorceeth,      ne gesacu ohwaer,
     "ecg-hete eoweeth,      ac him eal worold
1740 "wendeeth on willan;      he þaet wyrse ne con,
     "oeth þaet him on innan      ofer-hygda dael
     "weaxeeth and wridaeth,      þonne se weard swefeeth,
     "sawele hyrde:      bieth se slaep to faest,
     "bisgum gebunden,      bona swiethe neah,
1745 "se þe of flan-bogan      fyrenum sceoteeth.


XXVI. THE DISCOURSE IS ENDED.--BEOWULF PREPARES TO LEAVE.

     "Þonne bieth on hreethre      under helm drepen
     "biteran straele:      him bebeorgan ne con
     "wom wundor-bebodum      wergan gastes;
     "þinceeth him to lytel,      þaet he to lange heold,
1750 "gytsaeth grom-hydig,      nallas on gylp seleeth
     "faette beagas      and he þa foreth-gesceaft
     "forgyteeth and forgymeeth,      þaes þe him aer god sealde
     "wuldres waldend,      weoreth-mynda dael.
     "Hit on ende-staef      eft gelimpeeth,
1755 "þaet se lic-homa      laene gedreoseeth,
     "faege gefealleeth;      feheth oether to,
     "se þe unmurnlice      madmas daeleeth,
     "eorles aer-gestreon,      egesan ne gymeeth.
     "Bebeorh þe þone bealo-nieth,      Beowulf leofa,
1760 "secg se betsta,      and þe þaet selre geceos,
     "ece raedas;      oferhyda ne gym,
     "maere cempa!      Nu is þines maegnes blaed
     "ane hwile;      eft sona bieth,
     "þaet þec adl oethethe ecg      eafoethes getwaefeeth,
1765 "oethethe fyres feng      oethethe flodes wylm,
     "oethethe gripe meces      oethethe gares fliht,
     "oethethe atol yldo,      oethethe eagena bearhtm
     "forsiteeth and forsworceeth;      semninga bieth,
     "þaet þec, dryht-guma,      deaeth oferswyetheeth.
1770 "Swa ic Hring-Dena      hund missera
     "weold under wolcnum,      and hig wige beleac
     "manigum maegetha      geond þysne middan-geard,
     "aescum and ecgum,      þaet ic me aenigne
     "under swegles begong      gesacan ne tealde.
1775 "Hwaet! me þaes on eethle      edwenden cwom,
     "gyrn aefter gomene,      seoethethan Grendel weareth,
     "eald-gewinna,      in-genga min:
     "ic þaere socne      singales waeg
     "mod-ceare micle.      Þaes sig metode þanc,
1780 "ecean drihtne,      þaes þe ic on aldre gebad,
     "þaet ic on þone hafelan      heoro-dreorigne
     "ofer eald gewin      eagum starige!
     "Ga nu to setle,      symbel-wynne dreoh
     "wigge weorethad:      unc sceal worn fela
1785 "maethma gemaenra,      siethethan morgen bieth."
     Geat waes glaed-mod,      geong sona to,
     setles neosan,      swa se snottra heht.
     Þa waes eft swa aer      ellen-rofum,
     flet-sittendum      faegere gereorded
1790 niowan stefne.      Niht-helm geswearc
     deorc ofer dryht-gumum.      Dugueth eal aras;
     wolde blonden-feax      beddes neosan,
     gamela Scylding.      Geat ungemetes wel,
     rofne rand-wigan      restan lyste:
1795 sona him sele-þegn      siethes wergum,
     feorran-cundum      foreth wisade,
     se for andrysnum      ealle beweotede
     þegnes þearfe,      swylce þy dogore
     heaetho-liethende      habban scoldon.
1800 Reste hine þa rum-heort;      reced hlifade
     geap and gold-fah,      gaest inne swaef,
     oeth þaet hrefn blaca      heofones wynne
     blieth-heort bodode.      Þa com beorht sunne
     scacan ofer grundas;      scaethan onetton,
1805 waeron aeethelingas      eft to leodum
     fuse to farenne,      wolde feor þanon
     cuma collen-ferheth      ceoles neosan.
     Heht þa se hearda      Hrunting beran,
     sunu Ecglafes,      heht his sweord niman,
1810 leoflic iren;      saegde him þaes leanes þanc,
     cwaeeth he þone gueth-wine      godne tealde,
     wig-craeftigne,      nales wordum log
     meces ecge:      þaet waes modig secg.
     And þa sieth-frome      searwum gearwe
1815 wigend waeron,      eode weoreth Denum
     aeetheling to yppan,      þaer se oether waes
     haele hilde-deor,      Hroethgar grette.


XXVII. THE PARTING WORDS.

     Beowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
     "Nu we sae-liethend      secgan wyllaeth
1820 "feorran cumene,      þaet we fundiaeth
     "Higelac secan.      Waeron her tela
     "willum bewenede;      þu us wel dohtest.
     "Gif ic þonne on eorethan      owihte maeg
     "þinre mod-lufan      maran tilian,
1825 "gumena dryhten,      þonne ic gyt dyde,
     "gueth-geweorca      ic beo gearo sona.
     "Gif ic þaet gefricge      ofer floda begang,
     "þaet þec ymbe-sittend      egesan þywaeth,
     "swa þec hetende      hwilum dydon,
1830 "ic þe þusenda      þegna bringe,
     "haeleetha to helpe.      Ic on Higelace wat,
     "Geata dryhten,      þeah þe he geong sy,
     "folces hyrde,      þaet he mec fremman wile
     "wordum and worcum,      þaet ic þe wel herige,
1835 "and þe to geoce      gar-holt bere
     "maegenes fultum,      þaer þe bieth manna þearf;
     "gif him þonne Hreethric      to hofum Geata
     "geþingeeth, þeodnes bearn,      he maeg þaer fela
     "freonda findan:      feor-cyethethe beoeth
1840 "selran gesohte      þaem þe him selfa deah."
     Hroethgar maethelode      him on andsware:
     "Þe þa word-cwydas      wittig drihten
     "on sefan sende!      ne hyrde ic snotorlicor
     "on swa geongum feore      guman þingian:
1845 "þu eart maegenes strang      and on mode frod,
     "wis word-cwida.      Wen ic talige,
     "gif þaet gegangeeth,      þaet þe gar nymeeth,
     "hild heoru-grimme      Hreethles eaferan,
     "adl oethethe iren      ealdor þinne,
1850 "folces hyrde,      and þu þin feorh hafast,
     "þaet þe Sae-Geatas      selran naebben
     "to geceosenne      cyning aenigne,
     "hord-weard haeleetha,      gif þu healdan wylt
     "maga rice.      Me þin mod-sefa
1855 "licaeth leng swa wel,      leofa Beowulf:
     "hafast þu gefered,      þaet þam folcum sceal,
     "Geata leodum      and Gar-Denum
     "sib gemaenum      and sacu restan,
     "inwit-niethas,      þe hie aer drugon;
1860 "wesan, þenden ic wealde      widan rices,
     "maethmas gemaene,      manig oetherne
     "godum gegretan      ofer ganotes baeeth;
     "sceal hring-naca      ofer heaethu bringan
     "lac and luf-tacen.      Ic þa leode wat
1865 "ge wieth feond ge wieth freond      faeste geworhte
     "aeghwaes untaele      ealde wisan."
     Þa git him eorla hleo      inne gesealde,
     mago Healfdenes      maethmas twelfe,
     het hine mid þaem lacum      leode swaese
1870 secean on gesyntum,      snude eft cuman.
     Gecyste þa      cyning aeethelum god,
     þeoden Scildinga,      þegen betstan
     and be healse genam;      hruron him tearas,
     blonden-feaxum:      him waes bega wen,
1875 ealdum infrodum,      oethres swiethor,
     þaet hi seoethethan      geseon moston
     modige on meethle.      Waes him se man to þon leof,
     þaet he þone breost-wylm      forberan ne mehte,
     ac him on hreethre      hyge-bendum faest
1880 aefter deorum men      dyrne langaeth
     beorn wieth blode.      Him Beowulf þanan,
     gueth-rinc gold-wlanc      graes-moldan traed,
     since hremig:      sae-genga bad
     agend-frean,      se þe on ancre rad.
1885 Þa waes on gange      gifu Hroethgares
     oft geaehted:      þaet waes an cyning
     aeghwaes orleahtre,      oeth þaet hine yldo benam
     maegenes wynnum,      se þe oft manegum scod.


XXVIII. BEOWULF RETURNS TO GEATLAND.--THE QUEENS HYGD AND THRYTHO.

     Cwom þa to flode      fela-modigra
1890 haeg-stealdra heap;      hring-net baeron,
     locene leoetho-syrcan.      Land-weard onfand
     eft-sieth eorla,      swa he aer dyde;
     no he mid hearme      of hliethes nosan
     gaestas grette,      ac him togeanes rad;
1895 cwaeeth þaet wilcuman      Wedera leodum
     scawan scir-hame      to scipe foron.
     Þa waes on sande      sae-geap naca
     hladen here-waedum,      hringed-stefna
     mearum and maethmum:      maest hlifade
1900 ofer Hroethgares      hord-gestreonum.
     He þaem bat-wearde      bunden golde
     swurd gesealde,      þaet he syethethan waes
     on meodu-bence      maethme þy weorethra,
     yrfe-lafe.      Gewat him on yeth-nacan,
1905 drefan deop waeter,      Dena land ofgeaf.
     Þa waes be maeste      mere-hraegla sum,
     segl sale faest.      Sund-wudu þunede,
     no þaer weg-flotan      wind ofer yethum
     siethes getwaefde;      sae-genga for,
1910 fleat famig-heals      foreth ofer yethe,
     bunden-stefna      ofer brim-streamas,
     þaet hie Geata clifu      ongitan meahton,
     cuethe naessas.      Ceol up geþrang,
     lyft-geswenced      on lande stod.
1915 Hraethe waes aet holme      hyeth-weard gearo,
     se þe aer lange tid,      leofra manna
     fus, aet faroethe      feor wlatode;
     saelde to sande      sid-faeethme scip
     oncer-bendum faest,      þy laes hym yetha þrym
1920 wudu wynsuman      forwrecan meahte.
     Het þa up beran      aeethelinga gestreon,
     fraetwe and faet-gold;      naes him feor þanon
     to gesecanne      sinces bryttan:
     Higelac Hreethling      þaer aet ham wunaeth,
1925 selfa mid gesiethum      sae-wealle neah;
     bold waes betlic,      brego-rof cyning,
     hea on healle,      Hygd swiethe geong,
     wis, wel-þungen,      þeah þe wintra lyt
     under burh-locan      gebiden haebbe
1930 Haereethes dohtor:      naes hio hnah swa þeah,
     ne to gneaeth gifa      Geata leodum,
     maethm-gestreona.      Mod Þryetho waeg,
     fremu folces cwen,      firen ondrysne:
     naenig þaet dorste      deor geneethan
1935 swaesra gesietha,      nefne sin-frea,
     þaet hire an daeges      eagum starede;
     ac him wael-bende      weotode tealde,
     hand-gewriethene:      hraethe seoethethan waes
     aefter mund-gripe      mece geþinged,
1940 þaet hit sceaethen-mael      scyran moste,
     cwealm-bealu cyethan.      Ne bieth swylc cwenlic þeaw
     idese to efnanne,      þeah þe hio aenlicu sy,
     þaette freoethu-webbe      feores onsaece
     aefter lige-torne      leofne mannan.
1945 Huru þaet onhohsnode      Heminges maeg;
     ealo drincende      oether saedan,
     þaet hio leod-bealewa      laes gefremede,
     inwit-nietha,      syethethan aerest weareth
     gyfen gold-hroden      geongum cempan,
1950 aeethelum diore,      syethethan hio Offan flet
     ofer fealone flod      be faeder lare
     siethe gesohte,      þaer hio syethethan wel
     in gum-stole,      gode maere,
     lif-gesceafta      lifigende breac,
1955 hiold heah-lufan      wieth haeleetha brego,
     ealles mon-cynnes      mine gefraege
     þone selestan      bi saem tweonum
     eormen-cynnes;      forþam Offa waes
     geofum and guethum      gar-cene man,
1960 wide geweorethod;      wisdome heold
     eethel sinne,      þonon Eomaer woc
     haeleethum to helpe,      Heminges maeg,
     nefa Garmundes,      nietha craeftig.


XXIX. HIS ARRIVAL. HYGELAC'S RECEPTION.

     Gewat him þa se hearda      mid his hond-scole
1965 sylf aefter sande      sae-wong tredan,
     wide waroethas.      Woruld-candel scan,
     sigel suethan fus:      hi sieth drugon,
     elne geeodon,      to þaes þe eorla hleo,
     bonan Ongenþeowes      burgum on innan,
1970 geongne gueth-cyning      godne gefrunon
     hringas daelan.      Higelace waes
     sieth Beowulfes      snude gecyethed,
     þaet þaer on worethig      wigendra hleo,
     lind-gestealla      lifigende cwom,
1975 heaetho-laces hal      to hofe gongan.
     Hraethe waes gerymed,      swa se rica bebead,
     feethe-gestum      flet innan-weard.
     Gesaet þa wieth sylfne,      se þa saecce genaes,
     maeg wieth maege,      syethethan man-dryhten
1980 þurh hleoethor-cwyde      holdne gegrette
     meaglum wordum.      Meodu-scencum
     hwearf geond þaet reced      Haereethes dohtor:
     lufode þa leode,      lieth-waege baer
     haelum to handa.      Higelac ongan
1985 sinne geseldan      in sele þam hean
     faegre fricgean,      hyne fyrwet braec,
     hwylce Sae-Geata      siethas waeron:
     "Hu lomp eow on lade,      leofa Biowulf,
     "þa þu faeringa      feorr gehogodest,
1990 "saecce secean      ofer sealt waeter,
     "hilde to Hiorote?      Ac þu Hroethgare
     "wid-cuethne wean      wihte gebettest,
     "maerum þeodne?      Ic þaes mod-ceare
     "sorh-wylmum seaeth,      siethe ne truwode
1995 "leofes mannes;      ic þe lange baed,
     "þaet þu þone wael-gaest      wihte ne grette,
     "lete Sueth-Dene      sylfe geweorethan
     "guethe wieth Grendel.      Gode ic þanc secge,
     "þaes þe ic þe gesundne      geseon moste."
2000 Biowulf maethelode,      bearn Ecgþiowes:
     "Þaet is undyrne,      dryhten Higelac,
     "maere gemeting      monegum fira,
     "hwylc orleg-hwil      uncer Grendles
     "weareth on þam wange,      þaer he worna fela
2005 "Sige-Scildingum      sorge gefremede,
     "yrmethe to aldre;      ic þaet eal gewraec,
     "swa ne gylpan þearf      Grendeles maga
     "aenig ofer eorethan      uht-hlem þone,
     "se þe lengest leofaeth      laethan cynnes,
2010 "fenne bifongen.      Ic þaer furethum cwom,
     "to þam hring-sele      Hroethgar gretan:
     "sona me se maera      mago Healfdenes,
     "syethethan he mod-sefan      minne cuethe,
     "wieth his sylfes sunu      setl getaehte.
2015 "Weorod waes on wynne;      ne seah ic widan feorh
     "under heofenes hwealf      heal-sittendra
     "medu-dream maran.      Hwilum maeru cwen,
     "friethu-sibb folca      flet eall geond-hwearf,
     "baedde byre geonge;      oft hio beah-wriethan
2020 "secge sealde,      aer hio to setle geong.
     "Hwilum for duguethe      dohtor Hroethgares
     "eorlum on ende      ealu-waege baer,
     "þa ic Freaware      flet-sittende
     "nemnan hyrde,      þaer hio naegled sinc
2025 "haeleethum sealde:      sio gehaten waes,
     "geong gold-hroden,      gladum suna Frodan;
     "hafaeth þaes geworden      wine Scyldinga
     "rices hyrde      and þaet raed talaeth,
     "þaet he mid þy wife      wael-faehetha dael,
2030 "saecca gesette.      Oft no seldan hwaer
     "aefter leod-hryre      lytle hwile
     "bon-gar bugeeth,      þeah seo bryd duge!


XXX. BEOWULF'S STORY OF THE SLAYINGS.

     "Maeg þaes þonne ofþyncan      þeoden Heaethobeardna
     "and þegna gehwam      þara leoda,
2035 "þonne he mid faemnan      on flett gaeeth,
     "dryht-bearn Dena      duguetha biwenede:
     "on him gladiaeth      gomelra lafe
     "heard and hring-mael,      Heaethobeardna gestreon,
     "þenden hie þam waepnum      wealdan moston,
2040 "oeth þaet hie forlaeddan      to þam lind-plegan
     "swaese gesiethas      ond hyra sylfra feorh.
     "Þonne cwieth aet beore,      se þe beah gesyheth,
     "eald aesc-wiga,      se þe eall geman
     "gar-cwealm gumena      (him bieth grim sefa),
2045 "onginneeth geomor-mod      geongne cempan
     "þurh hreethra gehygd      higes cunnian,
     "wig-bealu weccean      and þaet word acwyeth:
     "'Meaht þu, min wine,      mece gecnawan,
     "'þone þin faeder      to gefeohte baer
2050 "'under here-griman      hindeman siethe,
     "'dyre iren,      þaer hyne Dene slogon,
     "'weoldon wael-stowe,      syethethan wiether-gyld laeg,
     "'aefter haeleetha hryre,      hwate Scyldungas?
     "'Nu her þara banena      byre nat-hwylces,
2055 "'fraetwum hremig      on flet gaeeth,
     "'morethres gylpeeth      and þone maethethum byreeth,
     "'þone þe þu mid rihte      raedan sceoldest!'"
     "Manaeth swa and myndgaeth      maela gehwylce
     "sarum wordum,      oeth þaet sael cymeeth,
2060 "þaet se faemnan þegn      fore faeder daedum
     "aefter billes bite      blod-fag swefeeth,
     "ealdres scyldig;      him se oether þonan
     "losaeth lifigende,      con him land geare.
     "Þonne bioeth brocene      on ba healfe
2065 "aeth-sweord eorla;      syethethan Ingelde
     "weallaeth wael-niethas      and him wif-lufan
     "aefter cear-waelmum      colran weorethaeth.
     "Þy ic Heaethobeardna      hyldo ne telge,
     "dryht-sibbe dael      Denum unfaecne,
2070 "freond-scipe faestne.      Ic sceal foreth sprecan
     "gen ymbe Grendel,      þaet þu geare cunne,
     "sinces brytta,      to hwan syethethan weareth
     "hond-raes haeleetha.      Syethethan heofones gim
     "glad ofer grundas,      gaest yrre cwom,
2075 "eatol aefen-grom,      user neosan,
     "þaer we gesunde      sael weardodon;
     "þaer waes Hondscio      hild onsaege,
     "feorh-bealu faegum,      he fyrmest laeg,
     "gyrded cempa;      him Grendel weareth,
2080 "maerum magu-þegne      to mueth-bonan,
     "leofes mannes      lic eall forswealg.
     "No þy aer ut þa gen      idel-hende
     "bona blodig-toeth      bealewa gemyndig,
     "of þam gold-sele      gongan wolde,
2085 "ac he maegnes rof      min costode,
     "grapode gearo-folm.      Glof hangode
     "sid and syllic      searo-bendum faest,
     "sio waes orþoncum      eall gegyrwed
     "deofles craeftum      and dracan fellum:
2090 "he mec þaer on innan      unsynnigne,
     "dior daed-fruma,      gedon wolde,
     "manigra sumne:      hyt ne mihte swa,
     "syethethan ic on yrre      upp-riht astod.
     "To lang ys to reccenne,      hu ic þam leod-sceaethan
2095 "yfla gehwylces      ond-lean forgeald;
     "þaer ic, þeoden min,      þine leode
     "weorethode weorcum.      He on weg losade,
     "lytle hwile      lif-wynna breac;
     "hwaeethre him sio swiethre      swaethe weardade
2100 "hand on Hiorte      and he hean þonan,
     "modes geomor      mere-grund gefeoll.
     "Me þone wael-raes      wine Scildunga
     "faettan golde      fela leanode,
     "manegum maethmum,      syethethan mergen com
2105 "and we to symble      geseten haefdon.
     "Þaer waes gidd and gleo;      gomela Scilding
     "fela fricgende      feorran rehte;
     "hwilum hilde-deor      hearpan wynne,
     "gomen-wudu grette;      hwilum gyd awraec
2110 "soeth and sarlic;      hwilum syllic spell
     "rehte aefter rihte      rum-heort cyning.
     "Hwilum eft ongan      eldo gebunden,
     "gomel gueth-wiga      gioguethe cwiethan
     "hilde-strengo;      hreether inne weoll,
2115 "þonne he wintrum frod      worn gemunde.
     "Swa we þaer inne      andlangne daeg
     "niode naman,      oeth þaet niht becwom
     "oether to yldum.      Þa waes eft hraethe
     "gearo gyrn-wraece      Grendeles modor,
2120 "siethode sorh-full;      sunu deaeth fornam,
     "wig-hete Wedra.      Wif unhyre
     "hyre bearn gewraec,      beorn acwealde
     "ellenlice;      þaer waes Aesc-here,
     "frodan fyrn-witan,      feorh uethgenge;
2125 "noether hy hine ne moston,      syethethan mergen cwom,
     "deaeth-werigne      Denia leode
     "bronde forbaernan,      ne on bael hladan
     "leofne mannan:      hio þaet lic aetbaer
     "feondes faeethmum      under firgen-stream.
2130 "Þaet waes Hroethgare      hreowa tornost
     "þara þe leod-fruman      lange begeate;
     "þa se þeoden mec      þine life
     "healsode hreoh-mod,      þaet ic on holma geþring
     "eorl-scipe efnde,      ealdre geneethde,
2135 "maeretho fremede:      he me mede gehet.
     "Ic þa þaes waelmes,      þe is wide cueth,
     "grimne gryrelicne      grund-hyrde fond.
     "Þaer unc hwile waes      hand gemaene;
     "holm heolfre weoll      and ic heafde becearf
2140 "in þam grund-sele      Grendeles modor
     "eacnum ecgum,      unsofte þonan
     "feorh oethferede;      naes ic faege þa gyt,
     "ac me eorla hleo      eft gesealde
     "maethma menigeo,      maga Healfdenes.


XXXI. HE GIVES PRESENTS TO HYGELAC. HYGELAC REWARDS HIM. HYGELAC'S DEATH.
      BEOWULF REIGNS.

2145 "Swa se þeod-kyning      þeawum lyfde;
     "nealles ic þam leanum      forloren haefde,
     "maegnes mede,      ac he me maethmas geaf,
     "sunu Healfdenes,      on sinne sylfes dom;
     "þa ic þe, beorn-cyning,      bringan wylle,
2150 "estum geywan.      Gen is eall aet þe
     "lissa gelong:      ic lyt hafo
     "heafod-maga,      nefne Hygelac þec!"
     Het þa in beran      eafor, heafod-segn,
     heaetho-steapne helm,      hare byrnan,
2155 gueth-sweord geatolic,      gyd aefter wraec:
     "Me þis hilde-sceorp      Hroethgar sealde,
     "snotra fengel,      sume worde het,
     "þaet ic his aerest      þe eft gesaegde,
     "cwaeeth þaet hyt haefde      Hiorogar cyning,
2160 "leod Scyldunga      lange hwile:
     "no þy aer suna sinum      syllan wolde,
     "hwatum Heorowearde,      þeah he him hold waere,
     "breost-gewaedu.      Bruc ealles well!"
     Hyrde ic þaet þam fraetwum      feower mearas
2165 lungre gelice      last weardode,
     aeppel-fealuwe;      he him est geteah
     meara and maethma.      Swa sceal maeg don,
     nealles inwit-net      oethrum bregdan,
     dyrnum craefte      deaeth renian
2170 hond-gesteallan.      Hygelace waes,
     nietha heardum,      nefa swyethe hold
     and gehwaeether oethrum      hroethra gemyndig.
     Hyrde ic þaet he þone heals-beah      Hygde gesealde,
     wraetlicne wundur-maethethum,      þone þe him Wealhþeo geaf,
2175 þeodnes dohtor,      þrio wicg somod
     swancor and sadol-beorht;      hyre syethethan waes
     aefter beah-þege      breost geweorethod.
     Swa bealdode      bearn Ecgþeowes,
     guma guethum cueth,      godum daedum,
2180 dreah aefter dome,      nealles druncne slog
     heoreth-geneatas;      naes him hreoh sefa,
     ac he man-cynnes      maeste craefte
     gin-faestan gife,      þe him god sealde,
     heold hilde-deor.      Hean waes lange,
2185 swa hyne Geata bearn      godne ne tealdon,
     ne hyne on medo-bence      micles wyrethne
     drihten wereda      gedon wolde;
     swyethe oft saegdon,      þaet he sleac waere,
     aeetheling unfrom:      edwenden cwom
2190 tir-eadigum menn      torna gehwylces.
     Het þa eorla hleo      in gefetian,
     heaetho-rof cyning,      Hreethles lafe,
     golde gegyrede;      naes mid Geatum þa
     sinc-maethethum selra      on sweordes had;
2195 þaet he on Biowulfes      bearm alegde,
     and him gesealde      seofan þusendo,
     bold and brego-stol.      Him waes bam samod
     on þam leod-scipe      lond gecynde,
     eard eethel-riht,      oethrum swiethor
2200 side rice,      þam þaer selra waes.
     Eft þaet geiode      ufaran dogrum
     hilde-hlaemmum,      syethethan Hygelac laeg
     and Heardrede      hilde-meceas
     under bord-hreoethan      to bonan wurdon,
2205 þa hyne gesohtan      on sige-þeode
     hearde hilde-frecan,      Heaetho-Scilfingas,
     nietha genaegdan      nefan Hererices.
     Syethethan Beowulfe      brade rice
     on hand gehwearf:      he geheold tela
2210 fiftig wintru      (waes þa frod cyning,
     eald eethel-weard),      oeth þaet an ongan
     deorcum nihtum      draca ricsian,
     se þe on heare haeethe      hord beweotode,
     stan-beorh steapne:      stig under laeg,
2215 eldum uncueth.      Þaer on innan giong
     nietha nat-hwylces      neode gefeng
     haeethnum horde      hond . d . . geþ . . hwylc
     since fahne,      he þaet syethethan . . . . .
     . . . þ . . . leth . þ . . l . g
2220 slaepende be fyre,      fyrena hyrde
     þeofes craefte,      þaet sie . . . . ethioeth . . . . .
     . idh . folc-beorn,      þaet he gebolgen waes.


XXXII. THE FIRE-DRAKE. THE HOARD.

     Nealles mid geweoldum      wyrm-horda . . . craeft
     sohte sylfes willum,      se þe him sare gesceod,
2225 ac for þrea-nedlan      þeow nat-hwylces
     haeleetha bearna      hete-swengeas fleah,
     for ofer-þearfe      and þaer inne fealh
     secg syn-bysig.      Sona in þa tide
     þaet . . . . . þam gyste      . . . . br . g . stod,
2230 hwaeethre earm-sceapen . . . . . . .
     . . eth . . . sceapen o . . . . i r . . e se faes begeat,
     sinc-faet geseah:      þaer waes swylcra fela
     in þam eoreth-scraefe      aer-gestreona,
     swa hy on gear-dagum      gumena nat-hwylc
2235 eormen-lafe      aeethelan cynnes
     þanc-hycgende      þaer gehydde,
     deore maethmas.      Ealle hie deaeth fornam
     aerran maelum,      and se an þa gen
     leoda duguethe,      se þaer lengest hwearf,
2240 weard wine-geomor      wiscte þaes yldan,
     þaet he lytel faec      long-gestreona
     brucan moste.      Beorh eal gearo
     wunode on wonge      waeter-yethum neah,
     niwe be naesse      nearo-craeftum faest:
2245 þaer on innan baer      eorl-gestreona
     hringa hyrde      hard-fyrdne dael
     faettan goldes,      fea worda cwaeeth:
     "Heald þu nu, hruse,      nu haeleeth ne moston,
     "eorla aehte.      Hwaet! hit aer on þe
2250 "gode begeaton;      gueth-deaeth fornam,
     "feorh-bealo frecne      fyra gehwylcne,
     "leoda minra,      þara þe þis lif ofgeaf,
     "gesawon sele-dream.      Nah hwa sweord wege
     "oethethe fetige      faeted waege,
2255 "drync-faet deore:      dugueth ellor scoc.
     "Sceal se hearda helm      hyrsted golde
     "faetum befeallen:      feormiend swefaeth,
     "þa þe beado-griman      bywan sceoldon,
     "ge swylce seo here-pad,      sio aet hilde gebad
2260 "ofer borda gebraec      bite irena,
     "brosnaeth aefter beorne.      Ne maeg byrnan hring
     "aefter wig-fruman      wide feran
     "haeleethum be healfe;      naes hearpan wyn,
     "gomen gleo-beames,      ne god hafoc
2265 "geond sael swingeeth,      ne se swifta mearh
     "burh-stede beateeth.      Bealo-cwealm hafaeth
     "fela feorh-cynna      feorr onsended!"
     Swa giomor-mod      giohetho maende,
     an aefter eallum      unbliethe hweop,
2270 daeges and nihtes,      oeth þaet deaethes wylm
     hran aet heortan.      Hord-wynne fond
     eald uht-sceaetha      opene standan,
     se þe byrnende      biorgas seceeth
     nacod nieth-draca,      nihtes fleogeeth
2275 fyre befangen;      hyne fold-buend
     wide gesawon.      He gewunian sceall
     hlaw under hrusan,      þaer he haeethen gold
     waraeth wintrum frod;      ne byeth him wihte þe sel.
     Swa se þeod-sceaetha      þreo hund wintra
2280 heold on hrusan      hord-aerna sum
     eacen-craeftig,      oeth þaet hyne an abealh
     mon on mode:      man-dryhtne baer
     faeted waege,      frioetho-waere baed
     hlaford sinne.      Þa waes hord rasod,
2285 onboren beaga hord,      bene getiethad
     fea-sceaftum men.      Frea sceawode
     fira fyrn-geweorc      forman siethe.
     Þa se wyrm onwoc,      wroht waes geniwad;
     stonc þa aefter stane,      stearc-heort onfand
2290 feondes fot-last;      he to foreth gestop,
     dyrnan craefte,      dracan heafde neah.
     Swa maeg unfaege      eaethe gedigan
     wean and wraec-sieth,      se þe waldendes
     hyldo gehealdeeth.      Hord-weard sohte
2295 georne aefter grunde,      wolde guman findan,
     þone þe him on sweofote      sare geteode:
     hat and hreoh-mod      hlaew oft ymbe hwearf,
     ealne utan-weardne;      ne þaer aenig mon
     waes on þaere westenne.      Hwaeethre hilde gefeh,
2300 beado-weorces:      hwilum on beorh aethwearf,
     sinc-faet sohte;      he þaet sona onfand,
     þaet haefde gumena sum      goldes gefandod
     heah-gestreona.      Hord-weard onbad
     earfoethlice,      oeth þaet aefen cwom;
2305 waes þa gebolgen      beorges hyrde,
     wolde se laetha      lige forgyldan
     drinc-faet dyre.      Þa waes daeg sceacen
     wyrme on willan,      no on wealle leng
     bidan wolde,      ac mid baele for,
2310 fyre gefysed.      Waes se fruma egeslic
     leodum on lande,      swa hyt lungre weareth
     on hyra sinc-gifan      sare geendod.


XXXIII. BEOWULF RESOLVES TO KILL THE FIRE-DRAKE.

     Þa se gaest ongan      gledum spiwan,
     beorht hofu baernan;      bryne-leoma stod
2315 eldum on andan;      no þaer aht cwices
     laeth lyft-floga      laefan wolde.
     Waes þaes wyrmes wig      wide gesyne,
     nearo-fages nieth      nean and feorran,
     hu se gueth-sceaetha      Geata leode
2320 hatode and hynde:      hord eft gesceat,
     dryht-sele dyrnne      aer daeges hwile.
     Haefde land-wara      lige befangen,
     baele and bronde;      beorges getruwode,
     wiges and wealles:      him seo wen geleah.
2325 Þa waes Biowulfe      broga gecyethed
     snude to soethe,      þaet his sylfes him
     bolda selest      bryne-wylmum mealt,
     gif-stol Geata.      Þaet þam godan waes
     hreow on hreethre,      hyge-sorga maest:
2330 wende se wisa,      þaet he wealdende,
     ofer ealde riht,      ecean dryhtne
     bitre gebulge:      breost innan weoll
     þeostrum geþoncum,      swa him geþywe ne waes.
     Haefde lig-draca      leoda faesten,
2335 ea-lond utan,      eoreth-weard þone
     gledum forgrunden.      Him þaes gueth-cyning,
     Wedera þioden,      wraece leornode.
     Heht him þa gewyrcean      wigendra hleo
     eall-irenne,      eorla dryhten
2340 wig-bord wraetlic;      wisse he gearwe,
     þaet him holt-wudu      helpan ne meahte,
     lind wieth lige.      Sceolde laen-daga
     aeetheling aer-god      ende gebidan
     worulde lifes      and se wyrm somod;
2345 þeah þe hord-welan      heolde lange.
     Oferhogode þa      hringa fengel,
     þaet he þone wid-flogan      weorode gesohte,
     sidan herge;      no he him þa saecce ondred,
     ne him þaes wyrmes wig      for wiht dyde,
2350 eafoeth and ellen;      forþon he aer fela
     nearo neethende      nietha gedigde,
     hilde-hlemma,      syethethan he Hroethgares,
     sigor-eadig secg,      sele faelsode
     and aet guethe forgrap      Grendeles maegum,
2355 laethan cynnes.      No þaet laesest waes
     hond-gemota,      þaer mon Hygelac sloh,
     syethethan Geata cyning      guethe raesum,
     frea-wine folces      Freslondum on,
     Hreethles eafora      hioro-dryncum swealt,
2360 bille gebeaten;      þonan Biowulf com
     sylfes craefte,      sund-nytte dreah;
     + haefde him on earme      ... XXX
     hilde-geatwa,      þa he to holme stag.
     Nealles Hetware      hremge þorfton
2365 feethe-wiges,      þe him foran ongean
     linde baeron:      lyt eft becwom
     fram þam hild-frecan      hames niosan.
     Oferswam þa sioleetha bigong      sunu Ecgþeowes,
     earm an-haga      eft to leodum,
2370 þaer him Hygd gebead      hord and rice,
     beagas and brego-stol:      bearne ne truwode,
     þaet he wieth ael-fylcum      eethel-stolas
     healdan cuethe,      þa waes Hygelac dead.
     No þy aer fea-sceafte      findan meahton
2375 aet þam aeethelinge      aenige þinga,
     þaet he Heardrede      hlaford waere,
     oethethe þone cyne-dom      ciosan wolde;
     hwaeethre he him on folce      freond-larum heold,
     estum mid are,      oeth þaet he yldra weareth,
2380 Weder-Geatum weold.      Hyne wraec-maecgas
     ofer sae sohtan,      suna Ohteres:
     haefdon hy forhealden      helm Scylfinga,
     þone selestan      sae-cyninga,
     þara þe in Swio-rice      sinc brytnade,
2385 maerne þeoden.      Him þaet to mearce weareth;
     he þaer orfeorme      feorh-wunde hleat
     sweordes swengum,      sunu Hygelaces;
     and him eft gewat      Ongenþiowes bearn
     hames niosan,      syethethan Heardred laeg;
2390 let þone brego-stol      Biowulf healdan,
     Geatum wealdan:      þaet waes god cyning.


XXXIV. RETROSPECT OF BEOWULF.--STRIFE BETWEEN SWEONAS AND GEATAS.

     Se þaes leod-hryres      lean gemunde
     uferan dogrum,      Eadgilse weareth
     fea-sceaftum feond.      Folce gestepte
2395 ofer sae side      sunu Ohteres
     wigum and waepnum:      he gewraec syethethan
     cealdum cear-siethum,      cyning ealdre bineat.
     Swa he nietha gehwane      genesen haefde,
     sliethra geslyhta,      sunu Ecgþiowes,
2400 ellen-weorca,      oeth þone anne daeg,
     þe he wieth þam wyrme      gewegan sceolde.
     Gewat þa twelfa sum      torne gebolgen
     dryhten Geata      dracan sceawian;
     haefde þa gefrunen,      hwanan sio faeheth aras,
2405 bealo-nieth biorna;      him to bearme cwom
     maethethum-faet maere      þurh þaes meldan hond,
     Se waes on þam þreate      þreotteoetha secg,
     se þaes orleges      or onstealde,
     haeft hyge-giomor,      sceolde hean þonon
2410 wong wisian:      he ofer willan giong
     to þaes þe he eoreth-sele      anne wisse,
     hlaew under hrusan      holm-wylme neh,
     yeth-gewinne,      se waes innan full
     wraetta and wira:      weard unhiore,
2415 gearo gueth-freca,      gold-maethmas heold,
     eald under eorethan;      naes þaet yethe ceap,
     to gegangenne      gumena aenigum.
     Gesaet þa on naesse      nieth-heard cyning,
     þenden haelo abead      heoreth-geneatum
2420 gold-wine Geata:      him waes geomor sefa,
     waefre and wael-fus,      Wyrd ungemete neah,
     se þone gomelan      gretan sceolde,
     secean sawle hord,      sundur gedaelan
     lif wieth lice:      no þon lange waes
2425 feorh aeethelinges      flaesce bewunden.
     Biowulf maethelade,      bearn Ecgþeowes:
     "Fela ic on giogoethe      gueth-raesa genaes,
     "orleg-hwila:      ic þaet eall gemon.
     "Ic waes syfan-wintre,      þa mec sinca baldor,
2430 "frea-wine folca      aet minum faeder genam,
     "heold mec and haefde      Hreethel cyning,
     "geaf me sinc and symbel,      sibbe gemunde;
     "naes ic him to life      laethra owihte
     "beorn in burgum,      þonne his bearna hwylc,
2435 "Herebeald and Haeethcyn,      oethethe Hygelac min.
     "Waes þam yldestan      ungedefelice
     "maeges daedum      morethor-bed stred,
     "syethethan hyne Haeethcyn      of horn-bogan,
     "his frea-wine      flane geswencte,
2440 "miste mercelses      and his maeg ofscet,
     "broethor oetherne,      blodigan gare:
     "þaet waes feoh-leas gefeoht,      fyrenum gesyngad
     "hreethre hyge-meethe;      sceolde hwaeethre swa þeah
     "aeetheling unwrecen      ealdres linnan.
2445 "Swa bieth geomorlic      gomelum ceorle
     "to gebidanne,      þaet his byre ride
     "giong on galgan,      þonne he gyd wrece,
     "sarigne sang,      þonne his sunu hangaeth
     "hrefne to hroethre      and he him helpe ne maeg,
2450 "eald and in-frod,      aenige gefremman.
     "Symble bieth gemyndgad      morna gehwylce
     "eaforan ellor-sieth;      oethres ne gymeeth
     "to gebidanne      burgum on innan
     "yrfe-weardes,      þonne se an hafaeth
2455 "þurh deaethes nyd      daeda gefondad.
     "Gesyheth sorh-cearig      on his suna bure
     "win-sele westne,      wind-gereste,
     "reote berofene;      ridend swefaeth
     "haeleeth in hoethman;      nis þaer hearpan sweg,
2460 "gomen in geardum,      swylce þaer iu waeron.


XXXV. MEMORIES OF PAST TIME.--THE FEUD WITH THE FIRE-DRAKE.

     "Gewiteeth þonne on sealman,      sorh-leoeth gaeleeth
     "an aefter anum:      þuhte him eall to rum,
     "wongas and wic-stede.      Swa Wedra helm
     "aefter Herebealde      heortan sorge
2465 "weallende waeg,      wihte ne meahte
     "on þam feorh-bonan      faehethe gebetan:
     "no þy aer he þone heaetho-rinc      hatian ne meahte
     "laethum daedum,      þeah him leof ne waes.
     "He þa mid þaere sorge,      þe him sio sar belamp,
2470 "gum-dream ofgeaf,      godes leoht geceas;
     "eaferum laefde,      swa deeth eadig mon,
     "lond and leod-byrig,      þa he of life gewat.
     "Þa waes synn and sacu      Sweona and Geata,
     "ofer wid waeter      wroht gemaene,
2175 "here-nieth hearda,      syethethan Hreethel swealt,
     "oethethe him Ongenþeowes      eaferan waeran
     "frome fyrd-hwate,      freode ne woldon
     "ofer heafo healdan,      ac ymb Hreosna-beorh
     "eatolne inwit-scear      oft gefremedon.
2480 "Þaet maeg-wine      mine gewraecan,
     "faehethe and fyrene,      swa hyt gefraege waes,
     "þeah þe oether hit      ealdre gebohte,
     "heardan ceape:      Haeethcynne weareth,
     "Geata dryhtne,      gueth onsaege.
2485 "Þa ic on morgne gefraegn      maeg oetherne
     "billes ecgum      on bonan staelan,
     "þaer Ongenþeow      Eofores niosade:
     "gueth-helm toglad,      gomela Scylfing
     "hreas heoro-blac;      hond gemunde
2490 "faehetho genoge,      feorh-sweng ne ofteah.
     "Ic him þa maethmas,      þe he me sealde,
     "geald aet guethe,      swa me gifeethe waes,
     "leohtan sweorde:      he me lond forgeaf,
     "eard eethel-wyn.      Naes him aenig þearf,
2495 "þaet he to Gifethum      oethethe to Gar-Denum
     "oethethe in Swio-rice      secean þurfe
     "wyrsan wig-frecan,      weorethe gecypan;
     "symle ic him on feethan      beforan wolde,
     "ana on orde,      and swa to aldre sceall
2500 "saecce fremman,      þenden þis sweord þolaeth,
     "þaet mec aer and sieth      oft gelaeste,
     "syethethan ic for dugeethum      Daeghrefne weareth
     "to hand-bonan,      Huga cempan:
     "nalles he þa fraetwe      Fres-cyninge,
2505 "breost-weorethunge      bringan moste,
     "ac in campe gecrong      cumbles hyrde,
     "aeetheling on elne.      Ne waes ecg bona,
     "ac him hilde-grap      heortan wylmas,
     "ban-hus gebraec.      Nu sceall billes ecg,
2510 "hond and heard sweord      ymb hord wigan."
     Beowulf maethelode,      beot-wordum spraec
     niehstan siethe:      "Ic geneethde fela
     "guetha on geogoethe;      gyt ic wylle,
     "frod folces weard,      faehethe secan,
2515 "maerethum fremman,      gif mec se man-sceaetha
     "of eoreth-sele      ut geseceeth!"
     Gegrette þa      gumena gehwylcne,
     hwate helm-berend      hindeman siethe,
     swaese gesiethas:      "Nolde ic sweord beran,
2520 "waepen to wyrme,      gif ic wiste hu
     "wieth þam aglaecean      elles meahte
     "gylpe wiethgripan,      swa ic gio wieth Grendle dyde;
     "ac ic þaer heaethu-fyres      hates wene,
     "reethes and-hattres:      forþon ic me on hafu
2525 "bord and byrnan.      Nelle ic beorges weard
     "oferfleon fotes trem,      feond unhyre,
     "ac unc sceal weorethan aet wealle,      swa unc Wyrd geteoeth,
     "metod manna gehwaes.      Ic eom on mode from,
     "þaet ic wieth þone gueth-flogan      gylp ofersitte.
2530 "Gebide ge on beorge      byrnum werede,
     "secgas on searwum,      hwaeether sel maege
     "aefter wael-raese      wunde gedygan
     "uncer twega.      Nis þaet eower sieth,
     "ne gemet mannes,      nefne min anes,
2535 "þaet he wieth aglaecean      eofoetho daele,
     "eorl-scype efne.      Ic mid elne sceall
     "gold gegangan      oethethe gueth nimeeth,
     "feorh-bealu frecne,      frean eowerne!"
     Aras þa bi ronde      rof oretta,
2540 heard under helm,      hioro-sercean baer
     under stan-cleofu,      strengo getruwode
     anes mannes:      ne bieth swylc earges sieth.
     Geseah þa be wealle,      se þe worna fela,
     gum-cystum god,      guetha gedigde,
2545 hilde-hlemma,      þonne hnitan feethan,
     (stod on stan-bogan)      stream ut þonan
     brecan of beorge;      waes þaere burnan waelm
     heaetho-fyrum hat:      ne meahte horde neah
     unbyrnende      aenige hwile
2550 deop gedygan      for dracan lege.
     Let þa of breostum,      þa he gebolgen waes,
     Weder-Geata leod      word ut faran,
     stearc-heort styrmde;      stefn in becom
     heaetho-torht hlynnan      under harne stan.
2555 Hete waes onhrered,      hord-weard oncniow
     mannes reorde;      naes þaer mara fyrst,
     freode to friclan.      From aerest cwom
     orueth aglaecean      ut of stane,
     hat hilde-swat;      hruse dynede.
2560 Biorn under beorge      bord-rand onswaf
     wieth þam gryre-gieste,      Geata dryhten:
     þa waes hring-bogan      heorte gefysed
     saecce to seceanne.      Sweord aer gebraed
     god gueth-cyning      gomele lafe,
2565 ecgum ungleaw,      aeghwaeethrum waes
     bealo-hycgendra      broga fram oethrum.
     Stieth-mod gestod      wieth steapne rond
     winia bealdor,      þa se wyrm gebeah
     snude tosomne:      he on searwum bad.
2570 Gewat þa byrnende      gebogen scriethan to,
     gescife scyndan.      Scyld wel gebearg
     life and lice      laessan hwile
     maerum þeodne,      þonne his myne sohte,
     þaer he þy fyrste      forman dogore
2575 wealdan moste,      swa him Wyrd ne gescraf
     hreeth aet hilde.      Hond up abraed
     Geata dryhten,      gryre-fahne sloh
     incge lafe,      þaet sio ecg gewac
     brun on bane,      bat unswiethor,
2580 þonne his þiod-cyning      þearfe haefde,
     bysigum gebaeded.      Þa waes beorges weard
     aefter heaethu-swenge      on hreoum mode,
     wearp wael-fyre,      wide sprungon
     hilde-leoman:      hreeth-sigora ne gealp
2585 gold-wine Geata,      gueth-bill geswac
     nacod aet niethe,      swa hyt no sceolde,
     iren aer-god.      Ne waes þaet eethe sieth,
     þaet se maera      maga Ecgþeowes
     grund-wong þone      ofgyfan wolde;
2590 sceolde wyrmes willan      wic eardian
     elles hwergen,      swa sceal aeghwylc mon
     alaetan laen-dagas.      Naes þa long to þon,
     þaet þa aglaecean      hy eft gemetton.
     Hyrte hyne hord-weard,      hreether aeethme weoll,
2595 niwan stefne:      nearo þrowode
     fyre befongen      se þe aer folce weold.
     Nealles him on heape      hand-gesteallan,
     aeethelinga bearn      ymbe gestodon
     hilde-cystum,      ac hy on holt bugon,
2600 ealdre burgan.      Hiora in anum weoll
     sefa wieth sorgum:      sibb aefre ne maeg
     wiht onwendan,      þam þe wel þenceeth.


XXXVI. WIGLAF HELPS BEOWULF IN THE FEUD.

     Wiglaf waes haten      Weoxstanes sunu,
     leoflic lind-wiga,      leod Scylfinga,
2605 maeg Aelfheres:      geseah his mon-dryhten
     under here-griman      hat þrowian.
     Gemunde þa þa are,      þe he him aer forgeaf
     wic-stede weligne      Waegmundinga,
     folc-rihta gehwylc,      swa his faeder ahte;
2610 ne mihte þa forhabban,      hond rond gefeng,
     geolwe linde,      gomel swyrd geteah,
     þaet waes mid eldum      Eanmundes laf,
     suna Ohteres,      þam aet saecce weareth
     wracu wine-leasum      Weohstanes bana
2615 meces ecgum,      and his magum aetbaer
     brun-fagne helm,      hringde byrnan,
     eald sweord eotonisc,      þaet him Onela forgeaf,
     his gaedelinges      gueth-gewaedu,
     fyrd-searo fuslic:      no ymbe þa faehethe spraec,
2620 þeah þe he his broethor      bearn abredwade.
     He fraetwe geheold      fela missera,
     bill and byrnan,      oeth þaet his byre mihte
     eorl-scipe efnan,      swa his aer-faeder;
     geaf him þa mid Geatum      gueth-gewaeda
2625 aeghwaes unrim;      þa he of ealdre gewat,
     frod on foreth-weg.      Þa waes forma sieth
     geongan cempan,      þaet he guethe raes
     mid his freo-dryhtne      fremman sceolde;
     ne gemealt him se mod-sefa,      ne his maeges laf
2630 gewac aet wige:      þaet se wyrm onfand,
     syethethan hie togaedre      gegan haefdon.
     Wiglaf maethelode      word-rihta fela,
     saegde gesiethum,      him waes sefa geomor:
     "Ic þaet mael geman,      þaer we medu þegun,
2635 "þonne we geheton      ussum hlaforde
     "in bior-sele,      þe us þas beagas geaf,
     "þaet we him þa gueth-geatwa      gyldan woldon,
     "gif him þyslicu      þearf gelumpe,
     "helmas and heard sweord:      þe he usic on herge geceas
2640 "to þyssum sieth-fate      sylfes willum,
     "onmunde usic maeretha      and me þas maethmas geaf,
     "þe he usic gar-wigend      gode tealde,
     "hwate helm-berend,      þeah þe hlaford us
     "þis ellen-weorc      ana aþohte
2645 "to gefremmanne,      folces hyrde,
     "forþam he manna maest      maeretha gefremede,
     "daeda dollicra.      Nu is se daeg cumen,
     "þaet ure man-dryhten      maegenes behofaeth
     "godra gueth-rinca:      wutun gangan to,
2650 "helpan hild-fruman,      þenden hyt sy,
     "gled-egesa grim!      God wat on mec,
     "þaet me is micle leofre,      þaet minne lic-haman
     "mid minne gold-gyfan      gled faeethmie.
     "Ne þynceeth me gerysne,      þaet we rondas beren
2655 "eft to earde,      nemne we aeror maegen
     "fane gefyllan,      feorh ealgian
     "Wedra þiodnes.      Ic wat geare,
     "þaet naeron eald-gewyrht,      þaet he ana scyle
     "Geata duguethe      gnorn þrowian,
2660 "gesigan aet saecce:      sceal urum þaet sweord and helm,
     "byrne and byrdu-scrud      bam gemaene."
     Wod þa þurh þone wael-rec,      wig-heafolan baer
     frean on fultum,      fea worda cwaeeth:
     "Leofa Biowulf,      laest eall tela,
2665 "swa þu on geogueth-feore      geara gecwaede,
     "þaet þu ne alaete      be þe lifigendum
     "dom gedreosan:      scealt nu daedum rof,
     "aeetheling an-hydig,      ealle maegene
     "feorh ealgian;      ic þe fullaestu!"
2670 Aefter þam wordum      wyrm yrre cwom,
     atol inwit-gaest      oethre siethe,
     fyr-wylmum fah      fionda niosan,
     laethra manna;      lig-yethum forborn
     bord wieth ronde:      byrne ne meahte
2675 geongum gar-wigan      geoce gefremman:
     ac se maga geonga      under his maeges scyld
     elne geeode,      þa his agen waes
     gledum forgrunden.      Þa gen gueth-cyning
     maeretha gemunde,      maegen-strengo,
2680 sloh hilde-bille,      þaet hyt on heafolan stod
     niethe genyded:      Naegling forbaerst,
     geswac aet saecce      sweord Biowulfes
     gomol and graeg-mael.      Him þaet gifeethe ne waes,
     þaet him irenna      ecge mihton
2685 helpan aet hilde;      waes sio hond to strong,
     se þe meca gehwane      mine gefraege
     swenge ofersohte,      þonne he to saecce baer
     waepen wundrum heard,      naes him wihte þe sel.
     Þa waes þeod-sceaetha      þriddan siethe,
2690 frecne fyr-draca      faehetha gemyndig,
     raesde on þone rofan,      þa him rum ageald,
     hat and heaetho-grim,      heals ealne ymbefeng
     biteran banum;      he geblodegod weareth
     sawul-driore;      swat yethum weoll.


XXXVII. BEOWULF WOUNDED TO DEATH.

2695 Þa ic aet þearfe gefraegn      þeod-cyninges
     and-longne eorl      ellen cyethan,
     craeft and cenethu,      swa him gecynde waes;
     ne hedde he þaes heafolan,      ac sio hand gebarn
     modiges mannes,      þaer he his maeges healp,
2700 þaet he þone nieth-gaest      nioethor hwene sloh,
     secg on searwum,      þaet þaet sweord gedeaf
     fah and faeted,      þaet þaet fyr ongon
     sweethrian syethethan.      Þa gen sylf cyning
     geweold his gewitte,      waell-seaxe gebraed,
2705 biter and beadu-scearp,      þaet he on byrnan waeg:
     forwrat Wedra helm       wyrm on middan.
     Feond gefyldan      (ferh ellen wraec),
     and hi hyne þa begen      abroten haefdon,
     sib-aeethelingas:      swylc sceolde secg wesan,
2710 þegn aet þearfe.      Þaet þam þeodne waes
     siethast sige-hwile      sylfes daedum,
     worlde geweorces.      Þa sio wund ongon,
     þe him se eoreth-draca      aer geworhte,
     swelan and swellan.      He þaet sona onfand,
2715 þaet him on breostum      bealo-nieth weoll,
     attor on innan.      Þa se aeetheling giong,
     þaet he bi wealle,      wis-hycgende,
     gesaet on sesse;      seah on enta geweorc,
     hu þa stan-bogan      stapulum faeste
2720 ece eoreth-reced      innan heoldon.
     Hyne þa mid handa      heoro-dreorigne
     þeoden maerne      þegn ungemete till,
     wine-dryhten his      waetere gelafede,
     hilde-saedne      and his helm onspeon.
2725 Biowulf maethelode,      he ofer benne spraec,
     wunde wael-bleate      (wisse he gearwe,
     þaet he daeg-hwila      gedrogen haefde
     eorethan wynne;      þa waes eall sceacen
     dogor-gerimes,      deaeth ungemete neah):
2730 "Nu ic suna minum      syllan wolde
     "gueth-gewaedu,      þaer me gifeethe swa
     "aenig yrfe-weard      aefter wurde,
     "lice gelenge.      Ic þas leode heold
     "fiftig wintra:      naes se folc-cyning
2735 "ymbe-sittendra      aenig þara,
     "þe mec gueth-winum      gretan dorste,
     "egesan þeon.      Ic on earde bad
     "mael-gesceafta,      heold min tela,
     "ne sohte searo-niethas,      ne me swor fela
2740 "aetha on unriht.      Ic þaes ealles maeg,
     "feorh-bennum seoc,      gefean habban:
     "forþam me witan ne þearf      waldend fira
     "morethor-bealo maga,      þonne min sceaceeth
     "lif of lice.      Nu þu lungre
2745 "geong, hord sceawian      under harne stan,
     "Wiglaf leofa,      nu se wyrm ligeeth,
     "swefeeth sare wund,      since bereafod.
     "Bio nu on ofoste,      þaet ic aer-welan,
     "gold-aeht ongite,      gearo sceawige
2750 "swegle searo-gimmas,      þaet ic þy seft maege
     "aefter maethethum-welan      min alaetan
     "lif and leod-scipe,      þone ic longe heold."


XXXVIII. THE JEWEL-HOARD. THE PASSING OF BEOWULF.

     Þa ic snude gefraegn      sunu Wihstanes
     aefter word-cwydum      wundum dryhtne
2755 hyran heaetho-siocum,      hring-net beran,
     brogdne beadu-sercean      under beorges hrof.
     Geseah þa sige-hreethig,      þa he bi sesse geong,
     mago-þegn modig      maethethum-sigla fela,
     gold glitinian      grunde getenge,
2760 wundur on wealle      and þaes wyrmes denn,
     ealdes uht-flogan,      orcas stondan,
     fyrn-manna fatu      feormend-lease,
     hyrstum behrorene:      þaer waes helm monig,
     eald and omig,      earm-beaga fela,
2765 searwum gesaeled.      Sinc eaethe maeg,
     gold on grunde,      gumena cynnes
     gehwone ofer-higian,      hyde se þe wylle!
     Swylce he siomian geseah      segn eall-gylden
     heah ofer horde,      hond-wundra maest,
2770 gelocen leoetho-craeftum:      of þam leoma stod,
     þaet he þone grund-wong      ongitan meahte,
     wraete giond-wlitan.      Naes þaes wyrmes þaer
     onsyn aenig,      ac hyne ecg fornam.
     Þa ic on hlaewe      gefraegn hord reafian,
2775 eald enta geweorc      anne mannan,
     him on bearm hladan      bunan and discas
     sylfes dome,      segn eac genom,
     beacna beorhtost;      bill aer-gescod
     (ecg waes iren)      eald-hlafordes
2780 þam þara maethma      mund-bora waes
     longe hwile,      lig-egesan waeg
     hatne for horde,      hioro-weallende,
     middel-nihtum,      oeth þaet he morethre swealt.
     Ar waes on ofoste      eft-siethes georn,
2785 fraetwum gefyrethred:      hyne fyrwet braec,
     hwaeether collen-fereth      cwicne gemette
     in þam wong-stede      Wedra þeoden,
     ellen-siocne,      þaer he hine aer forlet.
     He þa mid þam maethmum      maerne þioden,
2790 dryhten sinne      driorigne fand
     ealdres aet ende:      he hine eft ongon
     waeteres weorpan,      oeth þaet wordes ord
     breost-hord þurhbraec.      Beowulf maethelode,
     gomel on giohethe      (gold sceawode):
2795 "Ic þara fraetwa      frean ealles þanc
     "wuldur-cyninge      wordum secge,
     "ecum dryhtne,      þe ic her on starie,
     "þaes þe ic moste      minum leodum
     "aer swylt-daege      swylc gestrynan.
2800 "Nu ic on maethma hord      mine bebohte
     "frode feorh-lege,      fremmaeth ge nu
     "leoda þearfe;      ne maeg ic her leng wesan.
     "Hataeth heaetho-maere      hlaew gewyrcean,
     "beorhtne aefter baele      aet brimes nosan;
2805 "se scel to gemyndum      minum leodum
     "heah hlifian      on Hrones naesse,
     "þaet hit sae-liethend      syethethan hatan
     "Biowulfes biorh,      þa þe brentingas
     "ofer floda genipu      feorran drifaeth."
2810 Dyde him of healse      hring gyldenne
     þioden þrist-hydig,      þegne gesealde,
     geongum gar-wigan,      gold-fahne helm,
     beah and byrnan,      het hyne brucan well:
     "Þu eart ende-laf      usses cynnes,
2815 "Waegmundinga;      ealle Wyrd forsweof,
     "mine magas      to metod-sceafte,
     "eorlas on elne:      ic him aefter sceal."
     Þaet waes þam gomelan      gingeste word
     breost-gehygdum,      aer he bael cure,
2820 hate heaetho-wylmas:      him of hreethre gewat
     sawol secean      soeth-faestra dom.


XXXIX. THE COWARD-THANES.

     Þa waes gegongen      guman unfrodum
     earfoethlice,      þaet he on eorethan geseah
     þone leofestan      lifes aet ende
2825 bleate gebaeran.      Bona swylce laeg,
     egeslic eoreth-draca,      ealdre bereafod,
     bealwe gebaeded:      beah-hordum leng
     wyrm woh-bogen      wealdan ne moste,
     ac him irenna      ecga fornamon,
2830 hearde heaetho-scearpe      homera lafe,
     þaet se wid-floga      wundum stille
     hreas on hrusan      hord-aerne neah,
     nalles aefter lyfte      lacende hwearf
     middel-nihtum,      maethm-aehta wlonc
2835 ansyn ywde:      ac he eorethan gefeoll
     for þaes hild-fruman      hond-geweorce.
     Huru þaet on lande      lyt manna þah
     maegen-agendra      mine gefraege,
     þeah þe he daeda gehwaes      dyrstig waere,
2840 þaet he wieth attor-sceaethan      oreethe geraesde,
     oethethe hring-sele      hondum styrede,
     gif he waeccende      weard onfunde
     buan on beorge.      Biowulfe weareth
     dryht-maethma dael      deaethe forgolden;
2845 haefde aeghwaeether      ende gefered
     laenan lifes.      Naes þa lang to þon,
     þaet þa hild-latan      holt ofgefan,
     tydre treow-logan      tyne aetsomne,
     þa ne dorston aer      dareethum lacan
2850 on hyra man-dryhtnes      miclan þearfe;
     ac hy scamiende      scyldas baeran,
     gueth-gewaedu,      þaer se gomela laeg:
     wlitan on Wiglaf.      He gewergad saet,
     feethe-cempa      frean eaxlum neah,
2855 wehte hyne waetre;      him wiht ne speow;
     ne meahte he on eorethan,      þeah he uethe wel,
     on þam frum-gare      feorh gehealdan,
     ne þaes wealdendes willan      wiht oncirran;
     wolde dom godes      daedum raedan
2860 gumena gehwylcum,      swa he nu gen deeth.
     Þa waes aet þam geongan      grim andswaru
     eeth-begete þam þe aer      his elne forleas.
     Wiglaf maethelode,      Weohstanes sunu,
     secg sarig-fereth      seah on unleofe:
2865 "Þaet la maeg secgan,      se þe wyle soeth sprecan,
     "þaet se mon-dryhten,      se eow þa maethmas geaf,
     "eored-geatwe,      þe ge þaer on standaeth,
     "þonne he on ealu-bence      oft gesealde
     "heal-sittendum      helm and byrnan,
2870 "þeoden his þegnum,      swylce he þryethlicost
     "ohwaer feor oethethe neah      findan meahte,
     "þaet he genunga      gueth-gewaedu
     "wraethe forwurpe.      Þa hyne wig beget,
     "nealles folc-cyning      fyrd-gesteallum
2875 "gylpan þorfte;      hwaeethre him god uethe,
     "sigora waldend,      þaet he hyne sylfne gewraec
     "ana mid ecge,      þa him waes elnes þearf,
     "Ic him lif-wraethe      lytle meahte
     "aetgifan aet guethe      and ongan swa þeah
2880 "ofer min gemet      maeges helpan:
     "symle waes þy saemra,      þonne ic sweorde drep
     "ferheth-geniethlan,      fyr unswiethor
     "weoll of gewitte.      Wergendra to lyt
     "þrong ymbe þeoden,      þa hyne sio þrag becwom.
2885 "Nu sceal sinc-þego      and swyrd-gifu
     "eall eethel-wyn      eowrum cynne,
     "lufen alicgean:      lond-rihtes mot
     "þaere maeg-burge      monna aeghwylc
     "idel hweorfan,      syethethan aeethelingas
2890 "feorran gefricgean      fleam eowerne,
     "dom-leasan daed.      Deaeth bieth sella
     "eorla gehwylcum      þonne edwit-lif!"


XL. THE SOLDIER'S DIRGE AND PROPHECY.

     Heht þa þaet heaetho-weorc      to hagan biodan
     up ofer eg-clif,      þaer þaet eorl-weorod
2895 morgen-longne daeg      mod-giomor saet,
     bord-haebbende,      bega on wenum
     ende-dogores      and eft-cymes
     leofes monnes.      Lyt swigode
     niwra spella,      se þe naes gerad,
2900 ac he soethlice      saegde ofer ealle;
     "Nu is wil-geofa      Wedra leoda,
     "dryhten Geata      deaeth-bedde faest,
     "wunaeth wael-reste      wyrmes daedum;
     "him on efn ligeeth      ealdor-gewinna,
2905 "siex-bennum seoc:      sweorde ne meahte
     "on þam aglaecean      aenige þinga
     "wunde gewyrcean.      Wiglaf siteeth
     "ofer Biowulfe,      byre Wihstanes,
     "eorl ofer oethrum      unlifigendum,
2910 "healdeeth hige-meethum      heafod-wearde
     "leofes and laethes.      Nu ys leodum wen
     "orleg-hwile,      syethethan underne
     "Froncum and Frysum      fyll cyninges
     "wide weoretheeth.      Waes sio wroht scepen
2915 "heard wieth Hugas,      syethethan Higelac cwom
     "faran flot-herge      on Fresna land,
     "þaer hyne Hetware      hilde gehnaegdon,
     "elne geeodon      mid ofer-maegene,
     "þaet se byrn-wiga      bugan sceolde,
2920 "feoll on feethan:      nalles fraetwe geaf
     "ealdor dugoethe;      us waes a syethethan
     "Merewioinga      milts ungyfeethe.
     "Ne ic to Sweo-þeode      sibbe oethethe treowe
     "wihte ne wene;      ac waes wide cueth,
2925 "þaette Ongenþio      ealdre besnyethede
     "Haeethcyn Hreethling      wieth Hrefna-wudu,
     "þa for on-medlan      aerest gesohton
     "Geata leode      Gueth-scilfingas.
     "Sona him se froda      faeder Ohtheres,
2930 "eald and eges-full      ond-slyht ageaf,
     "abreot brim-wisan,      bryd aheorde,
     "gomela io-meowlan      golde berofene,
     "Onelan modor      and Ohtheres,
     "and þa folgode      feorh-geniethlan
2935 "oeth þaet hi oetheodon      earfoethlice
     "in Hrefnes-holt      hlaford-lease.
     "Besaet þa sin-herge      sweorda lafe
     "wundum werge,      wean oft gehet
     "earmre teohhe      andlonge niht:
2940 "cwaeeth he on mergenne      meces ecgum
     "getan wolde,      sume on galg-treowum
     "fuglum to gamene.      Frofor eft gelamp
     "sarig-modum      somod aer-daege,
     "syethethan hie Hygelaces      horn and byman
2945 "gealdor ongeaton.      Þa se goda com
     "leoda dugoethe      on last faran.


XLI. HE TELLS OF THE SWEDES AND THE GEATAS.

     "Waes sio swat-swaethu      Sweona and Geata,
     "wael-raes wera      wide gesyne,
     "hu þa folc mid him      faehethe towehton.
2950 "Gewat him þa se goda      mid his gaedelingum,
     "frod fela geomor      faesten secean,
     "eorl Ongenþio      ufor oncirde;
     "haefde Higelaces      hilde gefrunen,
     "wlonces wig-craeft,      wiethres ne truwode,
2955 "þaet he sae-mannum      onsacan mihte,
     "heaetho-liethendum      hord forstandan,
     "bearn and bryde;      beah eft þonan
     "eald under eoreth-weall.      Þa waes aeht boden
     "Sweona leodum,      segn Higelace.
2960 "Freoetho-wong þone      foreth ofereodon,
     "syethethan Hreethlingas      to hagan þrungon.
     "Þaer weareth Ongenþio      ecgum sweorda,
     "blonden-fexa      on bid wrecen,
     "þaet se þeod-cyning      þafian sceolde
2965 "Eofores anne dom:      hyne yrringa
     "Wulf Wonreding      waepne geraehte,
     "þaet him for swenge      swat aedrum sprong
     "foreth under fexe.      Naes he forht swa þeh,
     "gomela Scilfing,      ac forgeald hraethe
2970 "wyrsan wrixle      wael-hlem þone,
     "syethethan þeod-cyning      þyder oncirde:
     "ne meahte se snella      sunu Wonredes
     "ealdum ceorle      ond-slyht giofan,
     "ac he him on heafde      helm aer gescer,
2975 "þaet he blode fah      bugan sceolde,
     "feoll on foldan;      naes he faege þa git,
     "ac he hyne gewyrpte,      þeah þe him wund hrine,
     "Let se hearda      Higelaces þegn
     "bradne mece,      þa his broethor laeg,
2980 "eald sweord eotonisc,      entiscne helm,
     "brecan ofer bord-weal:      þa gebeah cyning,
     "folces hyrde,      waes in feorh dropen.
     "Þa waeron monige,      þe his maeg wriethon,
     "ricone araerdon,      þa him gerymed weareth,
2985 "þaet hie wael-stowe      wealdan moston.
     "Þenden reafode      rinc oetherne,
     "nam on Ongenþio      iren-byrnan,
     "heard swyrd hilted      and his helm somod;
     "hares hyrste      Higelace baer.
2990 "He þam fraetwum feng      and him faegre gehet
     "leana fore leodum      and gelaeste swa:
     "geald þone gueth-raes      Geata dryhten,
     "Hreethles eafora,      þa he to ham becom,
     "Jofore and Wulfe      mid ofer-maethmum,
2995 "sealde hiora gehwaeethrum      hund þusenda
     "landes and locenra beaga;      ne þorfte him þa lean oethwitan
     "mon on middan-gearde,      syethethan hie þa maeretha geslogon;
     "and þa Jofore forgeaf      angan dohtor,
     "ham-weorethunge,      hyldo to wedde.
3000 "Þaet ys sio faehetho      and se feond-scipe,
     "wael-nieth wera,      þaes þe ic wen hafo,
     "þe us seceaeth to      Sweona leode,
     "syethethan hie gefricgeaeth      frean userne
     "ealdor-leasne,      þone þe aer geheold
3005 "wieth hettendum      hord and rice,
     "aefter haeleetha hryre      hwate Scylfingas,
     "folc-raed fremede      oethethe furethur gen
     "eorl-scipe efnde.      Nu is ofost betost,
     "þaet we þeod-cyning      þaer sceawian
3010 "and þone gebringan,      þe us beagas geaf,
     "on ad-faere.      Ne scel anes hwaet
     "meltan mid þam modigan,      ac þaer is maethma hord.
     "gold unrime      grimme geceapod
     "and nu aet siethestan      sylfes feore
3015 "beagas gebohte;      þa sceal brond fretan,
     "aeled þeccean,      nalles eorl wegan
     "maethethum to gemyndum,      ne maegeth scyne
     "habban on healse      hring-weorethunge,
     "ac sceall geomor-mod      golde bereafod
3020 "oft nalles aene      el-land tredan,
     "nu se here-wisa      hleahtor alegde,
     "gamen and gleo-dream.      Forþon sceall gar wesan
     "monig morgen-ceald      mundum bewunden,
     "haefen on handa,      nalles hearpan sweg
3025 "wigend weccean,      ac se wonna hrefn
     "fus ofer faegum,      fela reordian,
     "earne secgan,      hu him aet aete speow,
     "þenden he wieth wulf      wael reafode."
     Swa se secg hwata      secgende waes
3030 laethra spella;      he ne leag fela
     wyrda ne worda.      Weorod eall aras,
     eodon unbliethe      under Earna naes
     wollen-teare      wundur sceawian.
     Fundon þa on sande      sawul-leasne
3035 hlim-bed healdan,      þone þe him hringas geaf
     aerran maelum:      þa waes ende-daeg
     godum gegongen,      þaet se gueth-cyning,
     Wedra þeoden,      wundor-deaethe swealt.
     AEr hi gesegan      syllicran wiht,
3040 wyrm on wonge      wiether-raehtes þaer
     laethne licgean:      waes se leg-draca,
     grimlic gryre-gaest,      gledum beswaeled,
     se waes fiftiges      fot-gemearces.
     lang on legere,      lyft-wynne heold
3045 nihtes hwilum,      nyether eft gewat
     dennes niosian;      waes þa deaethe faest,
     haefde eoreth-scrafa      ende genyttod.
     Him big stodan      bunan and orcas,
     discas lagon      and dyre swyrd,
3050 omige þurh-etone,      swa hie wieth eorethan faeethm
     þusend wintra      þaer eardodon:
     þonne waes þaet yrfe      eacen-craeftig,
     iu-monna gold      galdre bewunden,
     þaet þam hring-sele      hrinan ne moste
3055 gumena aenig,      nefne god sylfa,
     sigora soeth-cyning,      sealde þam þe he wolde
     (he is manna gehyld)      hord openian,
     efne swa hwylcum manna,      swa him gemet þuhte.


XLII. WIGLAF SPEAKS. THE BUILDING OF THE BALE-FIRE.

     Þa waes gesyne,      þaet se sieth ne þah
3060 þam þe unrihte      inne gehydde
     wraete under wealle.      Weard aer ofsloh
     feara sumne;      þa sio faeheth geweareth
     gewrecen wraethlice.      Wundur hwar, þonne
     eorl ellen-rof      ende gefere
3065 lif-gesceafta,      þonne leng ne maeg
     mon mid his magum      medu-seld buan.
     Swa waes Biowulfe,      þa he biorges weard
     sohte, searo-niethas:      seolfa ne cuethe,
     þurh hwaet his worulde gedal      weorethan sceolde;
3070 swa hit oeth domes daeg      diope benemdon
     þeodnas maere,      þa þaet þaer dydon,
     þaet se secg waere      synnum scildig,
     hergum geheaetherod,      hell-bendum faest,
     wommum gewitnad,      se þone wong strade.
3075 Naes he gold-hwaet:      gearwor haefde
     agendes est      aer gesceawod.
     Wiglaf maethelode,      Wihstanes sunu:
     "Oft sceall eorl monig      anes willan
     "wraec adreogan,      swa us geworden is.
3080 "Ne meahton we gelaeran      leofne þeoden,
     "rices hyrde      raed aenigne,
     "þaet he ne grette      gold-weard þone,
     "lete hyne licgean,      þaer he longe waes,
     "wicum wunian      oeth woruld-ende.
3085 "Heoldon heah gesceap:      hord ys gesceawod,
     "grimme gegongen;      waes þaet gifeethe to swieth,
     "þe þone þeoden      þyder ontyhte.
     "Ic waes þaer inne      and þaet eall geond-seh,
     "recedes geatwa,      þa me gerymed waes,
3090 "nealles swaeslice      sieth alyfed
     "inn under eoreth-weall.      Ic on ofoste gefeng
     "micle mid mundum      maegen-byrethenne
     "hord-gestreona,      hider ut aetbaer
     "cyninge minum:      cwico waes þa gena,
3095 "wis and gewittig;      worn eall gespraec
     "gomol on gehetho      and eowic gretan het,
     "baed þaet ge geworhton      aefter wines daedum
     "in bael-stede      beorh þone hean
     "micelne and maerne,      swa he manna waes
3100 "wigend weoreth-fullost      wide geond eorethan,
     "þenden he burh-welan      brucan moste.
     "Uton nu efstan      oethre siethe
     "seon and secean      searo-geþraec,
     "wundur under wealle!      ic eow wisige,
3105 "þaet ge genoge      nean sceawiaeth
     "beagas and brad gold.      Sie sio baer gearo
     "aedre geaefned,      þonne we ut cymen,
     "and þonne geferian      frean userne,
     "leofne mannan,      þaer he longe sceal
3110 "on þaes waldendes      waere geþolian."
     Het þa gebeodan      byre Wihstanes,
     haele hilde-dior,      haeleetha monegum
     bold-agendra,      þaet hie bael-wudu
     feorran feredon,      folc-agende
3115 godum togenes:      "Nu sceal gled fretan
     "(weaxan wonna leg)      wigena strengel,
     "þone þe oft gebad      isern-scure,
     "þonne straela storm,      strengum gebaeded,
     "scoc ofer scild-weall,      sceft nytte heold,
3120 "feether-gearwum fus      flane full-eode."
     Huru se snotra      sunu Wihstanes
     acigde of corethre      cyninges þegnas
     syfone tosomne      þa selestan,
     eode eahta sum      under inwit-hrof;
3125 hilde-rinc sum      on handa baer
     aeled-leoman,      se þe on orde geong.
     Naes þa on hlytme,      hwa þaet hord strude,
     syethethan or-wearde      aenigne dael
     secgas gesegon      on sele wunian,
3130 laene licgan:      lyt aenig mearn,
     þaet hi ofostlice      ut geferedon
     dyre maethmas;      dracan ec scufun,
     wyrm ofer weall-clif,      leton waeg niman,
     flod faeethmian      fraetwa hyrde.
3135 Þaer waes wunden gold      on waen hladen,
     aeghwaes unrim,      aeetheling boren,
     har hilde-rinc      to Hrones naesse.


XLIII. BEOWULF'S FUNERAL PYRE.

     Him þa gegiredan      Geata leode
     ad on eorethan      un-waclicne,
3140 helmum behongen,      hilde-bordum,
     beorhtum byrnum,      swa he bena waes;
     alegdon þa to-middes      maerne þeoden
     haeleeth hiofende,      hlaford leofne.
     Ongunnon þa on beorge      bael-fyra maest
3145 wigend weccan:      wudu-rec astah
     sweart ofer swioethole,      swogende leg,
     wope bewunden      (wind-blond gelaeg)
     oeth þaet he þa ban-hus      gebrocen haefde,
     hat on hreethre.      Higum unrote
3150 mod-ceare maendon      mon-dryhtnes cwealm;
     swylce giomor-gyd      + lat . con meowle
     . . . . .      wunden heorde . . .
     serg (?) cearig saelde      geneahhe
     þaet hio hyre . . . . gas hearde
3155 . . . . . ede      waelfylla wonn . .
     hildes egesan      hyetho
     haf mid      heofon rece swealh (?)
     Geworhton þa      Wedra leode
     hlaew on hliethe,      se waes heah and brad,
3160 waeg-liethendum      wide gesyne,
     and betimbredon      on tyn dagum
     beadu-rofes becn:      bronda betost
     wealle beworhton,      swa hyt weorethlicost
     fore-snotre men      findan mihton.
3165 Hi on beorg dydon      beg and siglu,
     eall swylce hyrsta,      swylce on horde aer
     nieth-hydige men      genumen haefdon;
     forleton eorla gestreon      eorethan healdan,
     gold on greote,      þaer hit nu gen lifaeth
3170 eldum swa unnyt,      swa hit aeror waes.
     Þa ymbe hlaew riodan      hilde-deore,
     aeethelinga bearn      ealra twelfa,
     woldon ceare cwiethan,      kyning maenan,
     word-gyd wrecan      and ymb wer sprecan,
3175 eahtodan eorl-scipe      and his ellen-weorc
     duguethum demdon,      swa hit ge-defe bieth,
     þaet mon his wine-dryhten      wordum herge,
     ferhethum freoge,      þonne he foreth scile
     of lic-haman      laene weorethan.
3180 Swa begnornodon      Geata leode
     hlafordes hryre,      heoreth-geneatas,
     cwaedon þaet he waere      woruld-cyning
     mannum mildust      and mon-þwaerust,
     leodum liethost      and lof-geornost.




APPENDIX


THE ATTACK IN FINNSBURG. [Footnote: See v. 1069 _seqq._]

     ". . . . . . . . . . . naes byrnaeth naefre."
     Hleoethrode þa      heaetho-geong cyning:
     "Ne þis ne dagaeth eastan,      ne her draca ne fleogeeth,
     "ne her þisse healle      hornas ne byrnaeth,
5    "ac fer foreth beraeth      fugelas singaeth,
     "gylleeth graeg-hama,      gueth-wudu hlynneeth,
     "scyld scefte oncwyeth.      Nu scyneeth þes mona
     "waethol under wolcnum;      nu arisaeth wea-daeda,
     "þe þisne folces nieth      fremman willaeth.
10   "Ac onwacnigeaeth nu,      wigend mine,
     "hebbaeth eowre handa,      hicgeaeth on ellen,
     "winnaeth on orde,      wesaeth on mode!"
     Þa aras monig gold-hladen þegn,      gyrde hine his swurde;
     þa to dura eodon      drihtlice cempan,
15   Sigefereth and Eaha,      hyra sweord getugon,
     and aet oethrum durum      Ordlaf and Guethlaf,
     and Hengest sylf;      hwearf him on laste.
     Þa git Garulf      Guethere styrode,
     þaet hie swa freolic feorh      forman siethe
20   to þaere healle durum      hyrsta ne baeran,
     nu hyt nietha heard      anyman wolde:
     ac he fraegn ofer eal      undearninga,
     deor-mod haeleeth,      hwa þa duru heolde.
     "Sigefereth is min nama (cwaeeth he),      ic eom Secgena leod,
25   "wrecca wide cueth.      Fela ic weana gebad,
     "heardra hilda;      þe is gyt her witod,
     "swaeether þu sylf to me      secean wylle."
     Þa waes on wealle      wael-slihta gehlyn,
     sceolde celod bord      cenum on handa
30   ban-helm berstan.      Buruh-þelu dynede,
     oeth þaet aet þaere guethe      Garulf gecrang,
     ealra aerest      eoreth-buendra,
     Guethlafes sunu;      ymbe hine godra fela.
     Hwearf flacra hraew      hraefn, wandrode
35   sweart and sealo-brun;      swurd-leoma stod
     swylce eal Finns-buruh      fyrenu waere.
     Ne gefraegn ic naefre wurethlicor      aet wera hilde
     sixtig sige-beorna      sel gebaeran,
     ne naefre swanas swetne      medo sel forgyldan,
40   þonne Hnaefe guldon      his haeg-stealdas.
     Hig fuhton fif dagas,      swa hyra nan ne feol
     driht-gesietha,      ac hig þa duru heoldon.
     Þa gewat him wund haeleeth      on waeg gangan,
     saede þaet his byrne      abrocen waere,
45   here-sceorpum hror,      and eac waes his helm þyrl.
     Þa hine sona fraegn      folces hyrde,
     hu þa wigend      hyra wunda genaeson
     oethethe hwaeether þaera hyssa . . . . . . .




LIST OF NAMES; NOTES; AND GLOSSARY.

ABBREVIATIONS

m.: masculine.
f.: feminine.
n.: neuter.
nom., gen.: nominative, genitive, etc.
w.: weak.
w. v.: weak verb.
st.: strong.
st. v.: strong verb.
I., II., III.: first, second, third person.
comp.: compound.
imper.: imperative.
w.: with.
instr.: instrumental.
G. and Goth.: Gothic.
O.N.: Old Norse.
O.S.: Old Saxon.
O.H.G.: Old High German.
M.H.G.: Middle High German.

The vowel ae = _a_ in _glad_      }
The diphthong ae = _a_ in _hair_  } approximately.


The names Leo, Bugge, Rieger, etc., refer to authors of emendations.

Words beginning with ge- will be found under their root-word.

Obvious abbreviations, like subj., etc., are not included in this list.




LIST OF NAMES.

Abel, Cain's brother, 108.

Aelf-here (gen. Aelf-heres, 2605), a kinsman of Wiglaf's, 2605.

Aesc-here, confidential adviser of King Hroethgar (1326), older brother of
Yrmenlaf (1325), killed by Grendel's mother, 1295, 1324, 2123.

Ban-stan, father of Breca, 524.

Beo-wulf, son of Scyld, king of the Danes, 18, 19. After the death of his
father, he succeeds to the throne of the Scyldings, 53. His son is
Healfdene, 57.

Beo-wulf (Biowulf, 1988, 2390; gen. Beowulfes, 857, etc., Biowulfes, 2195,
2808, etc.; dat. Beowulfe, 610, etc., Biowulfe, 2325, 2843), of the race of
the Geatas. His father is the Waegmunding Ecgþeow (263, etc.); his mother a
daughter of Hreethel, king of the Geatas (374), at whose court he is brought
up after his seventh year with Hreethel's sons, Herebeald, Haeethcyn, and
Hygelac, 2429 ff. In his youth lazy and unapt (2184 f., 2188 f.); as man he
attains in the gripe of his hand the strength of thirty men, 379. Hence his
victories in his combats with bare hands (711 ff., 2502 ff.), while fate
denies him the victory in the battle with swords, 2683 f. His
swimming-match with Breca in his youth, 506 ff. Goes with fourteen Geatas
to the assistance of the Danish king, Hroethgar, against Grendel, 198 ff. His
combat with Grendel, and his victory, 711 ff., 819 ff. He is, in
consequence, presented with rich gifts by Hroethgar, 1021 ff. His combat with
Grendel's mother, 1442 ff. Having again received gifts, he leaves Hroethgar
(1818-1888), and returns to Hygelac, 1964 ff.--After Hygelac's last battle
and death, he flees alone across the sea, 2360 f. In this battle he crushes
Daeghrefn, one of the Hugas, to death, 2502 f. He rejects at the same time
Hygelac's kingdom and the hand of his widow (2370 ff.), but carries on the
government as guardian of the young Heardred, son of Hygelac, 2378 ff.
After Heardred's death, the kingdom falls to Beowulf, 2208,
2390.--Afterwards, on an expedition to avenge the murdered Heardred, he
kills the Scylfing, Eadgils (2397), and probably conquers his country.
--His fight with the drake, 2539 ff. His death, 2818. His burial, 3135 ff.

Breca (acc. Brecan, 506, 531), son of Beanstan, 524. Chief of the
Brondings, 521. His swimming-match with Beowulf, 506 ff.

Brondingas (gen. Brondinga, 521), Breca, their chief, 521.

Brosinga mene, corrupted from, or according to Muellenhoff, written by
mistake for, Breosinga mene (O.N., Brisinga men, cf. Haupts Zeitschr. XII.
304), collar, which the Brisingas once possessed.

Cain (gen. Caines, 107): descended from him are Grendel and his kin, 107,
1262 ff.

Daeg-hrefn (dat. Daeghrefne, 2502), a warrior of the Hugas, who, according to
2504-5, compared with 1203, and with 1208, seems to have been the slayer of
King Hygelac, in his battle against the allied Franks, Frisians, and Hugas.
Is crushed to death by Beowulf in a hand-to-hand combat, 2502 ff.

Dene (gen. Dena, 242, etc., Denia, 2126, Deniga, 271, etc.; dat. Denum,
768, etc.), as subjects of Scyld and his descendants, they are also called
Scyldings; and after the first king of the East Danes, Ing (Runenlied, 22),
Ing-wine, 1045, 1320. They are also once called Hreethmen, 445. On account of
their renowned warlike character, they bore the names Gar-Dene, 1, 1857,
Hring-Dene (Armor-Danes), 116, 1280, Beorht-Dene, 427, 610. The great
extent of this people is indicated by their names from the four quarters of
the heavens: East-Dene, 392, 617, etc., West-Dene, 383, 1579, Sueth-Dene,
463, Noreth-Dene, 784.--Their dwelling-place "in Scedelandum," 19, "on
Scedenigge," 1687, "be saem tweonum," 1686.

Ecg-laf (gen. Ecglafes, 499), Hunfereth's father, 499.

Ecg-þeow (nom. Ecgþeow, 263, Ecgþeo, 373; gen. Ecgþeowes, 529, etc.,
Ecgþiowes, 2000), a far-famed hero of the Geatas, of the house of the
Waegmundings. Beowulf is the son of Ecgþeow, by the only daughter of Hreethel,
king of the Geatas, 262, etc. Among the Wylfings, he has slain Heaetholaf
(460), and in consequence he goes over the sea to the Danes (463), whose
king, Hroethgar, by means of gold, finishes the strife for him, 470.

Ecg-wela (gen. Ecg-welan, 1711). The Scyldings are called his descendants,
1711. Grein considers him the founder of the older dynasty of Danish kings,
which closes with Heremod. See Heremod.

Elan, daughter of Healfdene, king of the Danes, (?) 62. According to the
restored text, she is the wife of Ongenþeow, the Scylfing, 62, 63.

Earna-naes, the Eagle Cape in the land of the Geatas, where occurred
Beowulf's fight with the drake, 3032.

Eadgils (dat. Eadgilse, 2393), son of Ohthere, and grandson of Ongenþeow,
the Scylfing, 2393. His older brother is

Eanmund (gen. Eanmundes, 2612). What is said about both in our poem
(2201-2207, 2380-2397, 2612-2620) is obscure, but the following may be
conjectured:--

The sons of Ohthere, Eanmund and Eadgils, have rebelled against their
father (2382), and must, in consequence, depart with their followers from
Swiorice, 2205-6, 2380. They come into the country of the Geatas to
Heardred (2380), but whether with friendly or hostile intent is not stated;
but, according to 2203 f., we are to presume that they came against
Heardred with designs of conquest. At a banquet (on feorme; or feorme, MS.)
Heardred falls, probably through treachery, by the hand of one of the
brothers, 2386, 2207. The murderer must have been Eanmund, to whom,
according to 2613, "in battle the revenge of Weohstan brings death."
Weohstan takes revenge for his murdered king, and exercises upon Eanmund's
body the booty-right, and robs it of helm, breastplate, and sword
(2616-17), which the slain man had received as gifts from his uncle, Onela,
2617-18. But Weohstan does not speak willingly of this fight, although he
has slain Onela's brother's son, 2619-20.--After Heardred's and Eanmund's
death, the descendant of Ongenþeow, Eadgils, returns to his home, 2388. He
must give way before Beowulf, who has, since Heardred's death, ascended the
throne of the Geatas, 2390. But Beowulf remembers it against him in after
days, and the old feud breaks out anew, 2392-94. Eadgils makes an invasion
into the land of the Geatas (2394-95), during which he falls at the hands
of Beowulf, 2397. The latter must have then obtained the sovereignty over
the Sweonas (3005-6, where only the version, Scylfingas, can give a
satisfactory sense).

Eofor (gen. Eofores, 2487, 2965; dat. Jofore, 2994, 2998), one of the
Geatas, son of Wonred and brother of Wulf (2965, 2979), kills the Swedish
king, Ongenþeow (2487 ff., 2978-82), for which he receives from King
Hygelac, along with other gifts, his only daughter in marriage, 2994-99.

Eormen-ric (gen. Eormenrices, 1202), king of the Goths (cf. about him, W.
Grimm, Deutsche Heldensage, p. 2, ff.). Hama has wrested the Brosinga mene
from him, 1202.

Eomaer, son of Offa and Þryetho (cf. Þryetho), 1961.

Finn (gen. Finnes, 1069, etc.; dat. Finne, 1129), son of Folcwalda (1090),
king of the North Frisians, i.e. of the Eotenas, husband of Hildeburg, a
daughter of Hoc, 1072, 1077. He is the hero of the inserted poem on the
Attack in Finnsburg, the obscure incidents of which are, perhaps, as
follows: In Finn's castle, Finnsburg, situated in Jutland (1126-28), the
Hocing, Hnaef, a relative--perhaps a brother--of Hildeburg is spending some
time as guest. Hnaef, who is a liegeman of the Danish king, Healfdene, has
sixty men with him (Finnsburg, 38). These are treacherously attacked one
night by Finn's men, 1073. For five days they hold the doors of their
lodging-place without losing one of their number (Finnsburg, 41, 42). Then,
however, Hnaef is slain (1071), and the Dane, Hengest, who was among Hnaef's
followers, assumes the command of the beleaguered band. But on the
attacking side the fight has brought terrible losses to Finn's men. Their
numbers are diminished (1081 f.), and Hildeburg bemoans a son and a brother
among the fallen (1074 f., cf. 1116, 1119). Therefore the Frisians offer
the Danes peace (1086) under the conditions mentioned (1087-1095), and it
is confirmed with oaths (1097), and money is given by Finn in propitiation
(1108). Now all who have survived the battle go together to Friesland, the
homo proper of Finn, and here Hengest remains during the winter, prevented
by ice and storms from returning home (Grein). But in spring the feud
breaks out anew. Guethlaf and Oslaf avenge Hnaef's fall, probably after they
have brought help from home (1150). In the battle, the hall is filled with
the corpses of the enemy. Finn himself is killed, and the queen is captured
and carried away, along with the booty, to the land of the Danes,
1147-1160.

Finna land. Beowulf reaches it in his swimming-race with Breca, 580.

Fitela, the son and nephew of the Waelsing, Sigemund, and his companion in
arms, 876-890. (Sigemund had begotten Fitela by his sister, Signy. Cf. more
at length Leo on Beowulf, p. 38 ff., where an extract from the legend of
the Walsungs is given.)

Folc-walda (gen. Folc-waldan, 1090), Finn's father, 1090.

Francan (gen. Francna, 1211; dat. Froncum, 2913). King Hygelac fell on an
expedition against the allied Franks, Frisians, and Hugas, 1211, 2917.

Fresan, Frisan, Frysan (gen. Fresena, 1094, Frysna, 1105, Fresna, 2916:
dat. Frysum, 1208, 2913). To be distinguished, are: 1) North Frisians,
whose king is Finn, 1069 ff.; 2) West Frisians, in alliance with the Franks
and Hugas, in the war against whom Hygelac falls, 1208, 2916. The country
of the former is called Frysland, 1127; that of the latter, Fresna land,
2916.

Fr..es wael (in Fr..es waele, 1071), mutilated proper name.

Freawaru, daughter of the Danish king, Hroethgar; given in marriage to
Ingeld, the son of the Heaethobeard king, Froda, in order to end a war
between the Danes and the Heaethobeardnas, 2023 ff., 2065.

Froda (gen. Frodan), father of Ingeld, the husband of Freaware, 2026.

Garmund (gen. Garmundes, 1963) father of Offa. His grandson is Eomaer,
1961-63.

Geatas (gen. Geata, 205, etc.; dat. Geatum, 195, etc.), a tribe in Southern
Scandinavia, to which the hero of this poem belongs; also called
Wedergeatas, 1493, 2552; or, Wederas, 225, 423, etc.; Guethgeatas, 1539;
Saegeatas, 1851, 1987. Their kings named in this poem are: Hreethel; Haeethcyn,
second son of Hreethel; Hygelac, the brother of Haeethcyn; Heardred, son of
Hygelac; then Beowulf.

Gifethas (dat. Gifethum, 2495), Gepidae, mentioned in connection with Danes and
Swedes, 2495.

Grendel, a fen-spirit (102-3) of Cain's race, 107, 111, 1262, 1267. He
breaks every night into Hroethgar's hall and carries off thirty warriors, 115
ff., 1583ff. He continues this for twelve years, till Beowulf fights with
him (147, 711 ff.), and gives him a mortal wound, in that he tears out one
of his arms (817), which is hung up as a trophy in the roof of Heorot, 837.
Grendel's mother wishes to avenge her son, and the following night breaks
into the hall and carries off Aeschere, 1295. Beowulf seeks for and finds
her home in the fen-lake (1493 ff.), fights with her (1498 ff.), and kills
her (1567); and cuts off the head of Grendel, who lay there dead (1589),
and brings it to Hroethgar, 1648.

Gueth-laf and Oslaf, Danish warriors under Hnaef, whose death they avenge on
Finn, 1149.

Halga, with the surname, _til_, the younger brother of the Danish king,
Hroethgar, 61. His son is Hroethulf, 1018, 1165, 1182.

Hama wrests the _Brosinga mene_ from Eormenric, 1199.

Haereeth (gen. Haereethes, 1982), father of Hygd, the wife of Hygelac, 1930,
1982.

Haeethcyn (dat. Haeethcynne, 2483), second son of Hreethel, king of the Geatas,
2435. Kills his oldest brother, Herebeald, accidentally, with an arrow,
2438 ff. After Hreethel's death, he obtains the kingdom, 2475, 2483. He falls
at Ravenswood, in the battle against the Swedish king, Ongenþeow, 2925. His
successor is his younger brother, Hygelac, 2944 ff., 2992.

Helmingas (gen. Helminga, 621). From them comes Wealhþeow, Hroethgar's wife,
621.

Heming (gen. Heminges, 1945, 1962). Offa is called Heminges maeg, 1945;
Eomaer, 1962. According to Bachlechner (Pfeiffer's Germania, I., p. 458),
Heming is the son of the sister of Garmund, Offa's father.

Hengest (gen. Hengestes, 1092; dat. Hengeste, 1084): about him and his
relations to Hnaef and Finn, see Finn.

Here-beald (dat. Herebealde, 2464), the oldest son of Hreethel, king of the
Geatas (2435), accidentally killed with an arrow by his younger brother,
Haeethcyn, 2440.

Here-mod (gen. Heremodes, 902), king of the Danes, not belonging to the
Scylding dynasty, but, according to Grein, immediately preceding it; is, on
account of his unprecedented cruelty, driven out, 902 ff., 1710.

Here-ric (gen. Hererices, 2207) Heardred is called Hererices nefa, 2207.
Nothing further is known of him.

Het-ware or Franks, in alliance with the Frisians and the Hugas, conquer
Hygelac, king of the Geatas, 2355, 2364 ff., 2917.

Healf-dene (gen. Healfdenes, 189, etc.), son of Beowulf, the Scylding (57);
rules the Danes long and gloriously (57 f.); has three sons, Heorogar,
Hroethgar, and Halga (61), and a daughter, Elan, who, according to the
renewed text of the passage, waes married to the Scylfing, Ongenþeow, 62,
63.

Heard-red (dat. Heardrede, 2203, 2376), son of Hygelac, king of the Geatas,
and Hygd. After his father's death, while still under age, he obtains the
throne (2371, 2376, 2379); wherefore Beowulf, as nephew of Heardred's
father, acts as guardian to the youth till he becomes older, 2378. He is
slain by Ohthere's sons, 2386. This murder Beowulf avenges on Eadgils,
2396-97.

Heaetho-beardnas (gen. -beardna, 2033, 2038, 2068), the tribe of the
Lombards. Their king, Froda, has fallen in a war with the Danes, 2029,
2051. In order to end the feud, King Hroethgar has given his daughter,
Freawaru, as wife to the young Ingeld, the son of Froda, a marriage that
does not result happily; for Ingeld, though he long defers it on account of
his love for his wife, nevertheless takes revenge for his father, 2021-2070
(Widsieth, 45-49).

Heaetho-laf (dat. Heaetho-lafe, 460), a Wylfingish warrior. Ecgþeow, Beowulf's
father, kills him, 460.

Heaetho-raemas reached by B. in the swimming-race with Beowulf, 519.

Heoro-gar (nom. 61; Heregar, 467; Hiorogar, 2159), son of Healfdene, and
older brother of Hroethgar, 61. His death is mentioned, 467. He has a son,
Heoroweard, 2162. His coat of mail Beowulf has received from Hroethgar
(2156), and presents it to Hygelac, 2158.

Heoro-weard (dat. Heorowearde, 2162), Heorogar's son, 2161-62.

Heort, 78. Heorot, 166 (gen. Heorotes, 403; dat. Heorote, 475, Heorute,
767, Hiorte, 2100). Hroethgar's throne-room and banqueting hall and
assembly-room for his liegemen, built by him with unusual splendor, 69, 78.
In it occurs Beowulf's fight with Grendel, 720 ff. The hall receives its
name from the stag's antlers, of which the one-half crowns the eastern
gable, the other half the western.

Hildeburh, daughter of Hoc, relative of the Danish leader, Hnaef, consort of
the Frisian king, Finn. After the fall of the latter, she becomes a captive
of the Danes, 1072, 1077, 1159. See also under Finn.

Hnaef (gen. Hnaefes, 1115), a Hocing (Widsieth, 29), the Danish King
Healfdene's general, 1070 ff. For his fight with Finn, his death and
burial, see under Finn.

Hond-scio, warrior of the Geatas: dat. 2077.

Hoc (gen. Hoces, 1077), father of Hildeburh, 1077; probably also of Hnaef
(Widsieth, 29).

Hreethel (gen. Hreethles, 1486), son of Swerting, 1204. King of the Geatas,
374. He has, besides, a daughter, who is married to Ecgþeow, and has borne
him Beowulf, (374), three sons, Herebeald, Haeethcyn, and Hygelac, 2435. The
eldest of these is accidentally killed by the second, 2440. On account of
this inexpiable deed, Hreethel becomes melancholy (2443), and dies, 2475.

Hreethla (gen. Hreethlan, MS. Hraedlan, 454), the same as Hreethel (cf. Muellenhoff
in Haupts Zeitschrift, 12, 260), the former owner of Beowulf's coat of
mail, 454.

Hreeth-men (gen. Hreeth-manna, 445), the Danes are so called, 445.

Hreeth-ric, son of Hroethgar, 1190, 1837.

Hrefna-wudu, 2926, or Hrefnes-holt, 2936, the thicket near which the
Swedish king, Ongenþeow, slew Haeethcyn, king of the Geatas, in battle.

Hreosna-beorh, promontory in the land of the Geatas, near which Ongenþeow's
sons, Ohthere and Onela, had made repeated robbing incursions into the
country after Hreethel's death. These were the immediate cause of the war in
which Hreethel's son, King Haeethcyn, fell, 2478 ff.

Hroeth-gar (gen. Hroethgares, 235, etc.; dat. Hroethgare, 64, etc.), of the
dynasty of the Scyldings; the second of the three sons of King Healfdene,
61. After the death of his elder brother, Heorogar, he assumes the
government of the Danes, 465, 467 (yet it is not certain whether Heorogar
was king of the Danes before Hroethgar, or whether his death occurred while
his father, Healfdene, was still alive). His consort is Wealhþeow (613), of
the stock of the Helmings (621), who has borne him two sons, Hreethric and
Hroethmund (1190), and a daughter, Freaware (2023), who has been given in
marriage to the king of the Heaethobeardnas, Ingeld. His throne-room (78
ff.), which has been built at great cost (74 ff.), is visited every night
by Grendel (102, 115), who, along with his mother, is slain by Beowulf (711
ff., 1493 ff). Hroethgar's rich gifts to Beowulf, in consequence, 1021, 1818;
he is praised as being generous, 71 ff., 80, 1028 ff., 1868 ff.; as being
brave, 1041 ff., 1771 ff.; and wise, 1699, 1725.--Other information about
Hroethgar's reign for the most part only suggested: his expiation of the
murder which Ecgþeow, Beowulf's father, committed upon Heaetholaf, 460, 470;
his war with the Heaethobeardnas; his adjustment of it by giving his
daughter, Freaware, in marriage to their king, Ingeld; evil results of this
marriage, 2021-2070.--Treachery of his brother's son, Hroethulf, intimated,
1165-1166.

Hroeth-mund, Hroethgar's son, 1190.

Hroeth-ulf, probably a son of Halga, the younger brother of King Hroethgar,
1018, 1182. Wealhþeow expresses the hope (1182) that, in case of the early
death of Hroethgar, Hroeth-ulf would prove a good guardian to Hroethgar's young
son, who would succeed to the government; a hope which seems not to have
been accomplished, since it appears from 1165, 1166 that Hroeth-ulf has
abused his trust towards Hroethgar.

Hrones-naes (dat. -naesse, 2806, 3137), a promontory on the coast of the
country of the Geatas, visible from afar. Here is Beowulf's grave-mound,
2806, 3137.

Hrunting (dat. Hruntinge, 1660), Hunfereth's sword, is so called, 1458, 1660.

Hugas (gen. Huga, 2503), Hygelac wars against them allied with the Franks
and Frisians, and falls, 2195 ff. One of their heroes is called Daeghrefn,
whom Beowulf slays, 2503.

[H]un-fereth, the son of Ecglaf, þyle of King Hroethgar. As such, he has his
place near the throne of the king, 499, 500, 1167. He lends his sword,
Hrunting, to Beowulf for his battle with Grendel's mother, 1456 f.
According to 588, 1168, he slew his brothers. Since his name is always
alliterated with vowels, it is probable that the original form was, as
Rieger (Zachers Ztschr., 3, 414) conjectures, Unfereth.

Hun-lafing, name of a costly sword, which Finn presents to Hengest, 1144.
See Note.

Hygd (dat. Hygde, 2173), daughter of Haereeth, 1930; consort of Hygelac, king
of the Geatas, 1927; her son, Heardred, 2203, etc.--Her noble, womanly
character is emphasized, 1927 ff.

Hyge-lac (gen. Hige-laces, 194, etc., Hygelaces, 2387; dat. Higelace, 452,
Hygelace, 2170), king of the Geatas, 1203, etc. His grandfather is
Swerting, 1204; his father, Hreethel, 1486, 1848; his older brothers,
Herebeald and Haeethcyn, 2435; his sister's son, Beowulf, 374, 375. After his
brother, Haeethcyn, is killed by Ongenþeow, he undertakes the government (2992
in connection with the preceding from 2937 on). To Eofor he gives, as
reward for slaying Ongenþeow, his only daughter in marriage, 2998. But much
later, at the time of the return of Beowulf from his expedition to Hroethgar,
we see him married to the very young Hygd, the daughter of Haereeth, 1930. The
latter seems, then, to have been his second wife. Their son is Heardred,
2203, 2376, 2387.--Hygelac falls during an expedition against the Franks,
Frisians, and Hugas, 1206, 1211, 2356-59, 2916-17.

Ingeld (dat. Ingelde, 2065), son of Froda, the Heaethobeard chief, who fell
in a battle with the Danes, 2051 ff. in order to end the war, Ingeld is
married to Freawaru, daughter of the Danish king, Hroethgar, 2025-30. Yet his
love for his young wife can make him forget only for a short while his
desire to avenge his father. He finally carries it out, excited thereto by
the repeated admonitions of an old warrior, 2042-70 (Widsieth, 45-59).

Ing-wine (gen. Ingwina, 1045, 1320), friends of Ing, the first king of the
East Danes. The Danes are so called, 1045, 1320.

Mere-wioingas (gen. Mere-wioinga, 2922), as name of the Franks, 2922.

Naegling, the name of Beowulf's sword, 2681.

Offa (gen. Offan, 1950), king of the Angles (Widsieth, 35), the son of
Garmund, 1963; married (1950) to Þryetho (1932), a beautiful but cruel woman,
of unfeminine spirit (1932 ff.), by whom he has a son, Eomaer, 1961.

Oht-here (gen. Ohtheres, 2929, 2933; Ohteres, 2381, 2393, 2395, 2613), son
of Ongenþeow, king of the Swedes, 2929. His sons are Eanmund (2612) and
Eadgils, 2393.

Onela (gen. Onelan, 2933), Ohthere's brother, 2617, 2933.

Ongen-þeow (nom. -þeow, 2487, -þio, 2952; gen. -þeowes, 2476, -þiowes,
2388; dat. -þio, 2987), of the dynasty of the Scylfings; king of the
Swedes, 2384. His wife is, perhaps, Elan, daughter of the Danish king,
Healfdene (62), and mother of two sons, Onela and Ohthere, 2933. She is
taken prisoner by Haeethcyn, king of the Geatas, on an expedition into Sweden,
which he undertakes on account of her sons' plundering raids into his
country, 2480 ff. She is set free by Ongenþeow (2931), who kills Haeethcyn,
2925, and encloses the Geatas, now deprived of their leader, in the
Ravenswood (2937 ff.), till they are freed by Hygelac, 2944. A battle then
follows, which is unfavorable to Ongenþeow's army. Ongenþeow himself,
attacked by the brothers, Wulf and Eofor, is slain by the latter, 2487 ff.,
2962 ff.

Os-laf, a warrior of Hnaef's, who avenges on Finn his leader's death, 1149
f.

Scede-land, 19. Sceden-ig (dat. Sceden-igge, 1687), O.N., Scan-ey, the most
southern portion of the Scandinavian peninsula, belonging to the Danish
kingdom, and, in the above-mentioned passages of our poem, a designation of
the whole Danish kingdom.

Scef or Sceaf. See Note.

Scyld (gen. Scyldes, 19), a Scefing. 4. His son is Beowulf, 18, 53: his
grandson, Healfdene, 57; his great-grandson, Hroethgar, who had two brothers
and a sister, 59 ff.--Scyld dies, 26; his body, upon a decorated ship, is
given over to the sea (32 ff.), just as he, when a child, drifted alone,
upon a ship, to the land of the Danes, 43 ff. After him his descendants
bear his name.

Scyldingas (Scyldungas, 2053; gen. Scyldinga, 53, etc., Scyldunga, 2102,
2160; dat. Scyldingum, 274, etc.), a name which is extended also to the
Danes, who are ruled by the Scyldings, 53, etc. They are also called
Ar-Scyldingas, 464; Sige-Scyldingas, 598, 2005; Þeod-Scyldingas, 1020;
Here-Scyldingas, 1109.

Scylfingas, a Swedish royal family, whose relationship seems to extend to
the Geatas, since Wiglaf, the son of Wihstan, who in another place, as a
kinsman of Beowulf, is called a Waegmunding (2815), is also called leod
Scylfinga, 2604. The family connections are perhaps as follows:--

              Scylf.
                |
     ------------------------
     Waegmund.         .......
        |                |
------------------  ----------
Ecgþeow.  Weohstan.  Ongenþeow.
   |         |           |
-------- -------- ---------------
Beowulf.  Wiglaf.  Onela. Ohthere.
                             |
                 -----------------
                 Eaumund. Eadgils.

The Scylfings are also called Heaetho-Scilfingas, 63, Gueth-Scylfingas, 2928.

Sige-mund (dat. -munde, 876, 885), the son of Waels, 878, 898. His (son and)
nephew is Fitela, 880, 882. His fight with the drake, 887 ff.

Swerting (gen. Swertinges, 1204), Hygelac's grandfather, and Hreethel's
father, 1204.

Sweon (gen. Sweona, 2473, 2947, 3002), also Sweo-þeod, 2923. The dynasty of
the Scylfings rules over them, 2382, 2925. Their realm is called Swiorice,
2384, 2496.

Þryetho, consort of the Angle king, Offa, 1932, 1950. Mother of Eomaer, 1961,
notorious on account of her cruel, unfeminine character, 1932 ff. She is
mentioned as the opposite to the mild, dignified Hygd, the queen of the
Geatas.

Waels (gen. Waelses, 898), father of Sigemund, 878, 898.

Waeg-mundingas (gen. Waegmundinga, 2608, 2815). The Waegmundings are on one
side, Wihstan and his son Wiglaf; on the other side, Ecgþeow and his son
Beowulf (2608, 2815). See under Scylfingas.

Wederas (gen. Wedera, 225, 423, 498, etc.), or Weder-geatas. See Geatas.

Weland (gen. Welandes, 455), the maker of Beowulf's coat of mail, 455.

Wendlas (gen. Wendla, 348): their chief is Wulfgar. See Wulfgar. The
Wendlas are, according to Grundtvig and Bugge, the inhabitants of Vendill,
the most northern part of Jutland, between Limfjord and the sea.

Wealh-þeow (613, Wealh-þeo, 665, 1163), the consort of King Hroethgar, of the
stock of the Helmings, 621. Her sons are Hreethric and Hroethmund, 1190; her
daughter, Freawaru, 2023.

Weoh-stan (gen. Weox-stanes, 2603, Weoh-stanes, 2863, Wih-stanes, 2753,
2908, etc.), a Waegmunding (2608), father of Wiglaf, 2603. In what
relationship to him Aelfhere, mentioned 2605, stands, is not
clear.--Weohstan is the slayer of Eanmund (2612), in that, as it seems, he
takes revenge for his murdered king, Heardred. See Eanmund.

Wig-laf, Weohstan's son, 2603, etc., a Waegmunding, 2815, and so also a
Scylfing, 2604; a kinsman of Aelfhere, 2605. For his relationship to
Beowulf, see the genealogical table under Scylfingas.--He supports Beowulf
in his fight with the drake, 2605 ff., 2662 ff. The hero gives him, before
his death, his ring, his helm, and his coat of mail, 2810 ff.

Won-red (gen. Wonredes, 2972), father of Wulf and Eofor, 2966, 2979.

Wulf (dat. Wulfe, 2994), one of the Geatas, Wonred's son. He fights in the
battle between the armies of Hygelac and Ongenþeow with Ongenþeow himself,
and gives him a wound (2966), whereupon Ongenþeow, by a stroke of his
sword, disables him, 2975. Eofor avenges his brother's fall by dealing
Ongenþeow a mortal blow, 2978 ff.

Wulf-gar, chief of the Wendlas, 348, lives at Hroethgar's court, and is his
"ar and ombiht," 335.

Wylfingas (dat. Wylfingum, 461). Ecgþeow has slain Heoetholaf, a warrior of
this tribe, 460.

Yrmen-laf, younger brother of Aeschere, 1325.


ADDITIONAL.

Eotenas (gen. pl. Eotena, 1073, 1089, 1142; dat. Eotenum, 1146), the
subjects of Finn, the North Frisians: distinguished from eoton, _giant_.
Vid eoton. Cf. Bugge, Beit., xii. 37; Earle, Beowulf in Prose, pp. 146,
198.

Hreethling, son of Hreethel, Hygelac: nom. sg. 1924; nom. pl., the subjects of
Hygelac, the Geats, 2961.

Scefing, the son (?) of Scef, or Sceaf, reputed father of Scyld, 4. See
Note.



ABBREVIATIONS.

               B.: Bugge.
              Br.: S.A. Brooke, Hist. of Early Eng. Lit.
               C.: Cosijn.
               E.: Earle, Deeds of Beowulf in Prose.
               G.: Garnett, Translation of Beowulf
              Gr.: Grein.
               H.: Heyne.
              Ha.: Hall, Translation of Beowulf.
           H.-So.: Heyne-Socin, 5th ed.
              Ho.: Holder.
               K.: Kemble.
              Kl.: Kluge.
         Muellenh.: Muellenhoff.
               R.: Rieger.
               S.: Sievers.
              Sw.: Sweet, Anglo-Saxon Reader, 6th ed.
          Ten Br.: Ten Brink.
              Th.: Thorpe.
               Z.: Zupitza.

                 PERIODICALS.

             Ang.: Anglia.
            Beit.: Paul und Branne's Beitraege.
       Eng. Stud.: Englische Studien.
            Germ.: Germania.
 Haupts Zeitschr.: Haupts Zeitschrift, etc.
 Mod. Lang. Notes: Modern Language Notes.
          Tidskr.: Tidskrift for Philologi.
Zachers Zeitschr.: Zachers Zeitschrift, etc.


NOTES.

l. 1. hwaet: for this interjectional formula opening a poem, cf. _Andreas,
Daniel, Juliana, Exodus, Fata Apost., Dream of the Rood_, and the
"Listenith lordinges!" of mediaeval lays.--E. Cf. Chaucer, Prologue, ed.
Morris, l. 853:

     "Sin I shal beginne the game,
     _What_, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!"

we ... gefrunon is a variant on the usual epic formulae ic gefraegn (l. 74)
and mine gefraege (l. 777). _Exodus, Daniel, Phoenix_, etc., open with the
same formula.

l. 1. "Gar was the javelin, armed with two of which the warrior went into
battle, and which he threw over the 'shield-wall.' It was barbed."--Br.
124. Cf. _Maldon_, l. 296; _Judith_, l. 224; _Gnom. Verses_, l. 22; etc.

l. 4. "Scild of the Sheaf, not 'Scyld the son of Scaf'; for it is too
inconsistent, even in myth, to give a patronymic to a foundling. According
to the original form of the story, Sceaf was the foundling; he had come
ashore with a sheaf of corn, and from that was named. This form of the
story is preserved in Ethelwerd and in William of Malmesbury. But here the
foundling is Scyld, and we must suppose he was picked up with the sheaf,
and hence his cognomen."--E., p. 105. Cf. the accounts of Romulus and
Remus, of Moses, of Cyrus, etc.

l. 6. egsian is also used in an active sense (not in the Gloss.), = _to
terrify_.

l. 15. S. suggests þa (_which_) for þaet, as object of dreogan; and for
aldor-lease, Gr. suggested aldor-ceare.--_Beit._ ix. 136.

S. translates: "For God had seen the dire need which the rulerless ones
before endured."

l. 18. "Beowulf (that is, Beaw of the Anglo-Saxon genealogists, not our
Beowulf, who was a Geat, not a Dane), 'the son of Scyld in Scedeland.' This
is our ancestral myth,--the story of the first culture-hero of the North;
'the patriarch,' as Rydberg calls him, 'of the royal families of Sweden,
Denmark, Angeln, Saxland, and England.'"--Br., p. 78. Cf. _A.-S. Chron._
an. 855.

H.-So. omits parenthetic marks, and reads (after S., _Beit._ ix. 135)
eaferan; cf. _Fata Apost._: lof wide sprang þeodnes þegna.

"The name _Beowulf_ means literally 'Bee-wolf,' wolf or ravager of
the bees, = bear. Cf. _beorn_, 'hero,' originally 'bear,' and
_beohata_, 'warrior,' in Caedmon, literally 'bee-hater' or
'persecutor,' and hence identical in meaning with _beowulf_."--Sw.

Cf. "Arcite and Palamon,
    That foughten _breme_, as it were bores two."
         --Chaucer, _Knightes Tale_, l. 841, ed. Morris.

Cf. M. Mueller, _Science of Lang._, Sec. Series, pp. 217, 218; and Hunt's
_Daniel_, 104.

l. 19. Cf. l. 1866, where Scedenig is used, = _Scania_, in Sweden(?).

l. 21. wine is pl.; cf. its apposition wil-gesiethas below. H.-So. compares
_Heliand_, 1017, for language almost identical with ll. 20, 21.

l. 22. on ylde: cf.
    "_In elde_ is bothe wisdom and usage."
       --Chaucer, _Knightes Tale_, l. 1590, ed. Morris.

l. 26. Reflexive objects often pleonastically accompany verbs of motion;
cf. ll. 234, 301, 1964, etc.

l. 28. faroeth = _shore, strand, edge._ Add these to the meanings in the
Gloss.

l. 31. The object of ahte is probably geweald, to be supplied from wordum
weold of l. 30.--H.-So.

R., Kl., and B. all hold conflicting views of this passage: _Beit._ xii.
80, ix. 188; _Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 382, etc. Kl. suggests laendagas for
lange.

l. 32. "hringed-stefna is sometimes translated 'with curved prow,' but it
means, I think, that in the prow were fastened rings through which the
cables were passed that tied it to the shore."--Br., p. 26. Cf. ll. 1132,
1898. Hring-horni was the mythic ship of the Edda. See Toller-Bosworth for
three different views; and cf. wunden-stefna (l. 220), hring-naca (l.
1863).

ll. 34-52. Cf. the burial of Haki on a funeral-pyre ship, _Inglinga Saga;_
the burial of Balder, Sinfioetli, Arthur, etc.

l. 35. "And this [their joy in the sea] is all the plainer from the number
of names given to the ship-names which speak their pride and affection. It
is the AEtheling's vessel, the Floater, the Wave-swimmer, the Ring-sterned,
the Keel, the Well-bound wood, the Sea-wood, the Sea-ganger, the Sea-broad
ship, the Wide-bosomed, the Prow-curved, the Wood of the curved neck, the
Foam-throated floater that flew like a bird."--Br., p. 168.

l. 49. "We know from Scandinavian graves ... that the illustrious dead were
buried ... in ships, with their bows to sea-ward; that they were however
not sent to sea, but were either burnt in that position, or mounded over
with earth."--E. See Du Chaillu, _The Viking Age_, xix.

l. 51. (1) sele-raedende (K., S., C.); (2) sele-raedenne (H.); (3)
sele-raedende (H.-So.). Cf. l. 1347; and see Ha.

l. 51. E. compares with this canto Tennyson's "Passing of Arthur" and the
legendary burial-journey of St. James of Campostella, an. 800.

l. 53. The poem proper begins with this, "There was once upon a time," the
first 52 lines being a prelude. Eleven of the "fitts," or cantos, begin
with the monosyllable þa, four with the verb gewitan, nine with the formula
Hroethgar (Beowulf, Unfereth) maethelode, twenty-four with monosyllables in
general (him, swa, se, hwaet, þa, heht, waes, maeg, cwom, straet).

l. 58. gamel. "The ... characteristics of the poetry are the use of archaic
forms and words, such as mec for me, the possessive sin, gamol, dogor, swat
for eald, daeg, blod, etc., after they had become obsolete in the prose
language, and the use of special compounds and phrases, such as hildenaedre
(_war-adder_) for 'arrow,' gold-gifa (_gold-giver_) for 'king,' ...
goldwine gumena (_goldfriend of men, distributor of gold to men_) for
'king,'" etc.--Sw. Other poetic words are ides, ielde (_men_), etc.

l. 60. H.-So. reads raeswa (referring to Heorogar alone), and places a point
(with the Ms.) after Heorogar instead of after raeswa. Cf. l. 469; see B.,
_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 193.

l. 62. Elan here (OHG. _Elana, Ellena, Elena, Elina, Alyan_) is thought by
B. (_Tidskr_. viii. 43) to be a remnant of the masc. name Onela, and he
reads: [On-]elan ewen, Heaethoscilfingas(=es) healsgebedda.

l. 68. For he, omitted here, cf. l. 300. Pronouns are occasionally thus
omitted insubord. clauses.--Sw.

l. 70. þone, here = þonne, _than_, and micel = mare? The passage, by a
slight change, might be made to read, medo-aern micle ma gewyrcean,--þone =
_by much larger than_,--in which þone (þonne) would come in naturally.

l. 73. folc-scare. Add _folk-share_ to the meanings in the Gloss.; and cf.
gueth-scearu.

l. 74. ic wide gefraegn: an epic formula very frequent in poetry, = _men
said._ Cf. _Judith_, ll. 7, 246; _Phoenix_, l. 1; and the parallel (noun)
formula, mine gefraege, ll. 777, 838, 1956, etc.

ll. 78-83. "The hall was a rectangular, high-roofed, wooden building, its
long sides facing north and south. The two gables, at either end, had
stag-horns on their points, curving forwards, and these, as well as the
ridge of the roof, were probably covered with shining metal, and glittered
bravely in the sun."--Br., p. 32.

l. 84. _Son-in-law and father-in-law;_ B., a so-called _dvanda_ compound.
Cf. l. 1164, where a similar compound means _uncle and nephew;_ and
Widsieth's suhtorfaedran, used of the same persons.

l. 88. "The word dream conveys the buzz and hum of social happiness, and
more particularly the sound of music and singing."--E. Cf. l. 3021; and
_Judith_, l. 350; _Wanderer_, l. 79, etc.

ll. 90-99. There is a suspicious similarity between this passage and the
lines attributed by Bede to Caedmon:

    Nu we sculan herian heofonrices Weard, etc.
      --Sw., p. 47.

ll. 90-98 are probably the interpolation of a Christian scribe.

ll. 92-97. "The first of these Christian elements [in _Beowulf_] is the
sense of a fairer, softer world than that in which the Northern warriors
lived.... Another Christian passage (ll. 107, 1262) derives all the demons,
eotens, elves, and dreadful sea-beasts from the race of Cain. The folly of
sacrificing to the heathen gods is spoken of (l. 175).... The other point
is the belief in immortality (ll. 1202, 1761)."--Br. 71.

l. 100. Cf. l. 2211, where the third dragon of the poem is introduced in
the same words. Beowulf is the forerunner of that other national
dragon-slayer, St. George.

l. 100. onginnan in _Beowulf_ is treated like verbs of motion and modal
auxiliaries, and takes the object inf. without to; cf. ll. 872, 1606, 1984,
244. Cf. _gan_ (= _did_) in Mid. Eng.: _gan_ espye (Chaucer, _Knightes
Tale_, l. 254, ed. Morris).

l. 101. B. and H.-So. read, feond on healle; cf. l. 142.--_Beit._ xii.

ll. 101-151. "Grimm connects [Grendel] with the Anglo-Saxon grindel (_a
bolt_ or _bar_).... It carries with it the notion of the bolts and bars of
hell, and hence _a fiend._ ... Ettmueller was the first ... to connect the
name with grindan, _to grind, to crush to pieces, to utterly destroy._
Grendel is then _the tearer, the destroyer_."--Br., p. 83.

l. 102. gaest = _stranger_ (Ha.); cf. ll. 1139, 1442, 2313, etc.

l. 103. See Ha., p. 4.

l. 106. "The perfect and pluperfect are often expressed, as in Modern
English, by haefeth and haefde with the past participle."--Sw. Cf. ll. 433,
408, 940, 205 (p. p. inflected in the last two cases), etc.

l. 106. S. destroys period here, reads in Caines, etc., and puts þone ...
drihten in parenthesis.

l. 108. þaes þe = _because_, especially after verbs of thanking (cf. ll.
228, 627, 1780, 2798); _according as_ (l. 1351).

l. 108. The def. article is omitted with Drihten (_Lord_) and Deofol
(_devil_; cf. l. 2089), as it is, generally, sparingly employed in poetry;
cf. to sae (l. 318), ofer sae (l. 2381), on lande (l. 2311), to raeste (l.
1238), on wicge (l. 286), etc., etc.

l. 119. weras (S., H.-So.); wera (K., Th.).--_Beit._ ix. 137.

l. 120. unfaelo = _uncanny_ (R.).

l. 131. E. translates, _majestic rage;_ adopting Gr.'s view that swyeth is =
Icel. sviethi, _a burn_ or _burning_. Cf. l. 737.

l. 142. B. supposes heal-þegnes to be corrupted from helþegnes; cf. l.
101.--_Beit._ xii. 80. See Guethlac, l. 1042.

l. 144. See Ha., p. 6, for S.'s rearrangement.

l. 146. S. destroys period after selest, puts waes ... micel in parenthesis,
and inserts a colon after tid.

l. 149. B. reads sarcwidum for syethethan.

l. 154. B. takes sibbe for accus. obj. of wolde, and places a comma after
Deniga.--_Beit._ xii. 82.

l. 159. R. suggests ac se for atol.

l. 168. H.-So. plausibly conjectures this parenthesis to be a late
insertion, as, at ll. 180-181, the Danes also are said to be heathen.
Another commentator considers the throne under a "spell of enchantment,"
and therefore it could not be touched.

l. 169. ne ... wisse: _nor had he desire to do so_ (W.). See Ha., p. 7, for
other suggestions.

l. 169. myne wisse occurs in _Wanderer_, l. 27.

l. 174. The gerundial inf. with to expresses purpose, defines a noun or
adjective, or, with the verb be, expresses duty or necessity passively; cf.
ll. 257, 473, 1004, 1420, 1806, etc. Cf. to + inf. at ll. 316, 2557.

ll. 175-188. E. regards this passage as dating the time and place of the
poem relatively to the times of heathenism. Cf. the opening lines, _In days
of yore_, etc., as if the story, even then, were very old.

l. 177. gast-bona is regarded by Ettmueller and G. Stephens (_Thunor_, p.
54) as an epithet of Thor (= _giant-killer_), a kenning for Thunor or Thor,
meaning both _man_ and _monster_.--E.

l. 189. Cf. l. 1993, where similar language is used. H.-So. takes both
mod-ceare and mael-ceare as accus., others as instr.

ll. 190, 1994. seaeth: for this use of seoethan cf. Bede, _Eccles. Hist._, ed.
Miller, p. 128, where p. p. soden is thus used.

l. 194. fram ham = _in his home_ (S., H.-So.); but fram ham may be for fram
him (_from them_, i.e. _his people_, or _from Hrothgar's_). Cf. Ha., p. 8.

l. 197. Cf. ll. 791, 807, for this fixed phrase.

l. 200. See _Andreas, Elene_, and _Juliana_ for swan-rad (_= sea_). "The
swan is said to breed wild now no further away than the North of Sweden."
--E. Cf. ganotes baeeth, l. 1862.

l. 203. Concessive clauses with þeah, þeah þe, þeah ... eal, vary with
subj. and ind., according as fact or contingency is dominant in the mind;
cf. ll. 526, 1168, 2032, etc. (subj.), 1103, 1614 (ind.). Cf. gif, nefne.

l. 204. hael, an OE. word found in Wuelker's Glossaries in various forms, =
_augury, omen, divination_, etc. Cf. haelsere, _augur_; hael, _omen;_
haelsung, _augurium_, haelsian, etc. Cf. Tac., _Germania_, 10.

l. 207. C. adds "= _impetrare_" to the other meanings of findan given in
the Gloss.

l. 217. Cf. l. 1910; and _Andreas_, l. 993.--E. E. compares Byron's

    "And fast and falcon-like the vessel flew,"
       --_Corsair_, i.17.

and Scott's

    "Merrily, merrily bounds the bark."
      --_Lord of the Isles_, iv. 7.

l. 218. Cf.
    "The fomy stedes on the golden brydel
    Gnawinge."
      --Chaucer, _Knightes Tale_, l. 1648, ed. Morris.

l. 219. Does an-tid mean _hour_ (Th.), or _corresponding hour_ = and-tid
(H.-So.), or _in due time_ (E.), or _after a time_, when oþres, etc., would
be adv. gen.? See C., _Beit._ viii. 568.

l. 224. eoletes may = (1) _voyage_; (2) _toil, labor_; (3) _hurried
journey;_ but _sea_ or _fjord_ appears preferable.

ll. 229-257. "The scenery ... is laid on the coast of the North Sea and the
Kattegat, the first act of the poem among the Danes in Seeland, the second
among the Geats in South Sweden."--Br., p. 15.

l. 239. "A shoal of simple terms express in _Beowulf_ the earliest
sea-thoughts of the English.... The simplest term is Sae.... To this they
added Waeter, Flod, Stream, Lagu, Mere, Holm, Grund, Heathu, Sund, Brim,
Garsecg, Eagor, Geofon, Fifel, Hron-rad, Swan-rad, Segl-rad,
Ganotes-baeeth."--Br., p. 163-166.

l. 239. "The infinitive is often used in poetry after a verb of motion
where we should use the present participle."--Sw. Cf. ll. 711, 721, 1163
1803, 268, etc. Cf. German _spazieren fahren reiten_, etc., and similar
constructions in French, etc.

l. 240, W. reads hringed-stefnan for helmas baeron. B. inserts (?) after
holmas and begins a new line at the middle of the verse. S. omits B.'s "on
the wall."

l. 245. Double and triple negatives strengthen each other and do not
produce an affirmative in A.-S. or M. E. The neg. is often prefixed to
several emphatic words in the sentence, and readily contracts with vowels,
and h or w; cf. ll. 863, 182, 2125, 1509, 575, 583, 3016, etc.

l. 249. seld-guma = _man-at-arms in another's house_ (Wood); = _low-ranking
fellow_ (Ha.); stubenhocker, _stay-at-home_ (Gr.), Scott's "carpet knight,"
_Marmion_, i. 5.

l. 250. naefne (nefne, nemne) usually takes the subj., = _unless_; cf. ll.
1057, 3055, 1553. For ind., = _except_, see l. 1354. Cf. butan, gif, þeah.

l. 250. For a remarkable account of armor and weapons in _Beowulf_, see S.
A. Brooke, _Hist. of Early Eng. Lit_. For general "Old Teutonic Life in
Beowulf," see J. A. Harrison, _Overland Monthly_.

l. 252. aer as a conj. generally has subj., as here; cf. ll. 264, 677, 2819,
732. For ind., cf. l. 2020.

l. 253. leas = _loose_, _roving_. Ettmueller corrected to lease.

l. 256. This proverb (ofest, etc.) occurs in _Exod_. (Hunt), l. 293.

l. 258. An "elder" may be a very young man; hence yldesta, = _eminent_, may
be used of Beowulf. Cf. _Laws of AElfred_, C. 17: Na þaet aelc eald sy, ac þaet
he eald sy on wisdome.

l. 273. Verbs of hearing and seeing are often followed by acc. with inf.;
cf. ll. 229, 1024, 729, 1517, etc. Cf. German construction with _sehen,
horen_, etc., French construction with _voir, entendre_, etc., and the
classical constructions.

l. 275. daed-hata = _instigator_. Kl. reads daed-hwata.

l. 280. ed-wendan, n. (B.; cf. 1775), = edwenden, limited by bisigu. So ten
Br. = _Tidskr_. viii. 291.

l. 287. "Each is denoted ... also by the strengthened forms 'aeghwaeether
('aegether), eghwaeether, etc. This prefixed 'ae, oe corresponds to the Goth,
_aiw_, OHG. _eo_, _io_, and is umlauted from a, o by the i of the gi which
originally followed."--Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 190.

l. 292. "All through the middle ages suits of armour are called
'weeds.'"--E.

l. 303. "An English warrior went into battle with a boar-crested helmet,
and a round linden shield, with a byrnie of ringmail ... with two javelins
or a single ashen spear some eight or ten feet long, with a long two-edged
sword naked or held in an ornamental scabbard.... In his belt was a short,
heavy, one-edged sword, or rather a long knife, called the seax ... used
for close quarters."--Br., p. 121.

l. 303. For other references to the boar-crest, cf. ll. 1112, 1287, 1454;
Grimm, _Myth._ 195; Tacitus, _Germania_, 45. "It was the symbol of their
[the Baltic AEstii's] goddess, and they had great faith in it as a
preservative from hard knocks."--E. See the print in the illus. ed. of
Green's _Short History_, Harper & Bros.

l. 303. "See Kemble, _Saxons in England_, chapter on heathendom, and
Grimm's _Teutonic Mythology_, chapter on Freyr, for the connection these
and other writers establish between the Boar-sign and the golden boar which
Freyr rode, and his worship."--Br., p. 128. Cf. _Elene_, l. 50.

l. 304. Gering proposes hleor-bergan = _cheek-protectors_; cf. _Beit._ xii.
26. "A bronze disk found at Oeland in Sweden represents two warriors in
helmets with boars as their crests, and cheek-guards under; these are the
hleor-bergan."--E. Cf. hauberk, with its diminutive habergeon, < A.-S.
heals, _neck_ + beorgan, _to cover_ or _protect_; and harbor, < A.-S. here,
_army_ + beorgan, id.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ xii. 123. Cf. cinberge, Hunt's
_Exod._ l. 175.

l. 305. For ferh wearde and guethmode grummon, B. and ten Br. read
ferh-wearde (l. 305) and guethmodgum men (l. 306), = _the boar-images ...
guarded the lives of the warlike men_.

l. 311. leoma: cf. Chaucer, _Nonne Preestes Tale_, l. 110, ed. Morris:

    "To dremen in here dremes
    Of armes, and of fyr with rede _lemes_."

l. 318. On the double gender of sae, cf. Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 147; and
note the omitted article at ll. 2381, 318, 544, with the peculiar tmesis of
_between_ at ll. 859, 1298, 1686, 1957. So _Caedmon_, l. 163 (Thorpe),
_Exod._ l. 562 (Hunt), etc.

l. 320. Cf. l. 924; and _Andreas_, l. 987, where almost the same words
occur. "Here we have manifestly before our eye one of those ancient
causeways, which are among the oldest visible institutions of
civilization." --E.

l. 322. S. inserts comma after scir, and makes hring-iren (= _ring-mail_)
parallel with gueth-byrne.

l. 325. Cf. l. 397. "The deposit of weapons outside before entering a house
was the rule at all periods.... In provincial Swedish almost everywhere a
church porch is called vakenhus,... i.e. _weapon-house_, because the
worshippers deposited their arms there before they entered the house."--E.,
after G. Stephens.

l. 333. Cf. Dryden's "mingled metal _damask'd_ o'er with gold."--E.

l. 336. "ael-, el-, kindred with Goth. _aljis_, other, e.g. in aelþeodig,
elþeodig, foreign."--Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 47.

l. 336. Cf. l. 673 for the functions of an ombiht-þegn.

l. 343. Cf. l. 1714 for the same beod-geneatas,--"the predecessor title to
that of the Knights of the Table Round."--E. Cf. _Andreas_ (K.), l. 2177.

l. 344. The future is sometimes expressed by willan + inf., generally with
some idea of volition involved; cf. ll. 351, 427, etc. Cf. the use of
willan as principal vb. (with omitted inf.) at ll. 318, 1372, 543, 1056;
and sculan, ll. 1784, 2817.

l. 353. sieth here, and at l. 501, probably means _arrival_. E. translates
the former by _visit_, the latter by _adventure_.

l. 357. unhar = _hairless, bald_ (Gr., etc.).

l. 358. eode is only one of four or five preterits of gan (gongan, gangan,
gengan), viz. geong (giong: ll. 926, 2410, etc.), gang (l. 1296, etc.),
gengde (ll. 1402, 1413). Sievers, p. 217, apparently remarks that eode is
"probably used only in prose." (?!). Cf. geng, _Gen._ ll. 626, 834; _Exod._
(Hunt) l. 102.

l. 367. The MS. and H.-So. read with Gr. and B. glaedman Hroethgar, abandoning
Thorkelin's glaednian. There is a glass. hilaris glaedman.--_Beit._ xii. 84;
same as glaed.

l. 369. dugan is a "preterit-present" verb, with new wk. preterit, like
sculan, durran, magan, etc. For various inflections, see ll. 573, 590,
1822, 526. Cf. _do_ in "that will _do_"; _doughty_, etc.

l. 372. Cf. l. 535 for a similar use; and l. 1220. Bede, _Eccles. Hist._,
ed. Miller, uses the same expression several times. "Here, and in all other
places where cniht occurs in this poem, it seems to carry that technical
sense which it bore in the military hierarchy [of a noble youth placed out
and learning the elements of the art of war in the service of a qualified
warrior, to whom he is, in a military sense, a servant], before it bloomed
out in the full sense of _knight_."--E.

l. 373. E. remarks of the hyphened eald-faeder, "hyphens are risky toys to
play with in fixing texts of pre-hyphenial antiquity"; eald-faeder could
only = _grandfather_. eald here can only mean _honored_, and the hyphen is
unnecessary. Cf. "old fellow," "my old man," etc.; and Ger. _alt-vater_.

l. 378. Th. and B. propose Geatum, as presents from the Danish to the
Geatish king.--_Beit._ xii.

l. 380. haebbe. The subj. is used in indirect narration and question, wish
and command, purpose, result, and hypothetical comparison with swelce = _as
if_.

ll. 386, 387. Ten Br. emends to read: "Hurry, bid the kinsman-throng go
into the hall together."

l. 387. sibbe-gedriht, for Beowulf's friends, occurs also at l. 730. It is
subject-acc. to seon. Cf. ll. 347, 365, and Hunt's _Exod_. l. 214.

l. 404. "Here, as in the later Icelandic halls, Beowulf saw Hrothgar
enthroned on a high seat at the east end of the hall. The seat is sacred.
It has a supernatural quality. Grendel, the fiend, cannot approach
it."--Br., p. 34. Cf. l. 168.

l. 405. "At Benty Grange, in Derbyshire, an Anglo-Saxon barrow, opened in
1848, contained a coat of mail. 'The iron chain work consists of a large
number of links of two kinds attached to each other by small rings half an
inch in diameter; one kind flat and lozenge-shaped ... the others all of
one kind, but of different lengths.'"--Br., p. 126.

l. 407. Wes ... hal: this ancient Teutonic greeting afterwards grew into
wassail. Cf. Skeat's _Luke_, i. 28; _Andreas_ (K.), 1827; Layamon, l.
14309, etc.

l. 414. "The distinction between wesan and weorethan [in passive relations]
is not very clearly defined, but wesan appears to indicate a state, weorethan
generally an action."--Sw. Cf. Mod. German _werden_ and _sein_ in similar
relations.

l. 414. Gr. translates hador by _receptaculum_; cf. Gering, _Zachers
Zeitschr._ xii. 124. Toller-Bosw. ignores Gr.'s suggestion.

ll. 420, 421. B. reads: þaer ic (_on_) fifelgeban (= _ocean_) yethde eotena
cyn. Ten Br. reads: þaer ic fifelgeban yethde, eotena ham. Ha. suggests
fifelgeband = _monster-band_, without further changes.

l. 420. R. reads þaera = _of them_, for þaer.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 399;
_Beit._ xii. 367.

l. 420. "niht has a gen., nihtes, used for the most part only adverbially,
and almost certainly to be regarded as masculine."--Cook's Sievers' Gram.,
p. 158.

l. 425. Cf. also ll. 435, 635, 2345, for other examples of Beowulf's
determination to fight single-handed.

l. 441. þe hine = _whom_, as at l. 1292, etc. The indeclinable þe is often
thus combined with personal pronouns, = relative, and is sometimes
separated from them by a considerable interval.--Sw.

l. 443. The MS. has Geotena. B. and Fahlbeck, says H.-So., do not consider
the Geatas, but the Jutes, as the inhabitants of Swedish West-Gothland.
Alfred translates Juti by Geatas, but _Jutland_ by _Gotland_. In the laws
they are called Guti.--_Beit._ xii. 1, etc.

l. 444. B., Gr., and Ha. make unforhte an adv. = _fearlessly_, modifying
etan. Kl. reads anforhte = _timid_.

l. 446. Cf. l. 2910. Th. translates: _thou wilt not need my head to hide_
(i.e. _bury_). Simrock supposes a dead-watch or lyke-wake to be meant.
Wood, _thou wilt not have to bury so much as my head!_ H.-So. supposes
heafod-weard, _a guard of honor_, such as sovereigns or presumptive rulers
had, to be meant by hafalan hydan; hence, _you need not give me any guard_,
etc. Cf. Schmid, _Gesetze der A._, 370-372.

l. 447. S. places a colon after nimeeth.

l. 451. H.-So., Ha., and B. (_Beit._ xii. 87) agree essentially in
translating feorme, _food_. R. translates _consumption of my corpse.
Maintenance, support_, seems preferable to either.

l. 452. Roenning (after Grimm) personifies Hild.--_Beovulfs Kvadet_, l. 59.
Hildr is the name of one of the Scandinavian Walkyries, or battle-maidens,
who transport the spirits of the slain to Walhalla. Cf. Kent's _Elene_, l.
18, etc.

l. 455. "The war-smiths, especially as forgers of the sword, were garmented
with legend, and made into divine personages. Of these Weland is the type,
husband of a swan maiden, and afterwards almost a god."-- Br., p. 120. Cf.
A. J. C. Hare's account of "Wayland Smith's sword with which Henry II. was
knighted," and which hung in Westminster Abbey to a late date.--_Walks in
London_, ii. 228.

l. 455. This is the aelces mannes wyrd of Boethius (Sw., p. 44) and the wyrd
bieth swiethost of Gnomic Verses, 5. There are about a dozen references to it
in _Beowulf_.

l. 455. E. compares the fatalism of this concluding hemistich with the
Christian tone of l. 685 _seq._

ll. 457, 458. B. reads waere-ryhtum ( = _from the obligations of
clientage_).

l. 480. Cf. l. 1231, where the same sense, "flown with wine," occurs.

l. 488. "The dugueth, the mature and ripe warriors, the aristocracy of the
nation, are the support of the throne."--E. The M. E. form of the word,
_douth_, occurs often. Associated with geogoeth, ll. 160 and 622.

l. 489. Kl. omits comma after meoto and reads (with B.) sige-hreeth-secgum, =
_disclose thy thought to the victor-heroes_. Others, as Koerner, convert
meoto into an imperative and divide on sael = _think upon happiness_. But
cf. onband beadu-rune, l. 501. B. supposes onsael meoto =_speak courteous
words_. _Tidskr_. viii. 292; _Haupts Zeitschr._ xi. 411; _Eng. Stud_. ii.
251.

l. 489. Cf. the invitation at l. 1783.

l. 494. Cf. Grimm's _Andreas_, l. 1097, for deal, =_proud, elated,
exulting; Phoenix_ (Bright), l. 266.

l. 499. MS. has Hunfereth, but the alliteration requires Unfereth, as at ll.
499, 1166, 1489; and cf. ll. 1542, 2095, 2930. See _List of Names_.

l. 501. sieth = _arrival_ (?); cf. l. 353.

l. 504. þon ma = _the more_ (?), may be added to the references under þon.

l. 506. E. compares the taunt of Eliab to David, I Sam. xvii. 28.

l. 509. dol-gilp = _idle boasting_. The second definition in the Gloss. is
wrong.

l. 513. "Eagor-stream might possibly be translated the stream of Eagor, the
awful terror-striking stormy sea in which the terrible [Scandinavian] giant
dwelt, and through which he acted."--Br., p. 164. He remarks, "The English
term _eagre_ still survives in provincial dialect for the tide-wave or bore
on rivers. Dryden uses it in his _Threnod. Angust._ 'But like an _eagre_
rode in triumph o'er the tide.' Yet we must be cautious," etc. Cf. Fox's
_Boethius_, ll. 20, 236; Thorpe's _Caedmon_, 69, etc.

l. 524. Krueger and B. read Banstanes.--_Beit._ ix. 573.

l. 525. R. reads wyrsan (= wyrses: cf. Mod. Gr. _guten Muthes_) geþinges;
but H.-So. shows that the MS. wyrsan ... þingea = wyrsena þinga, _can
stand_; cf. gen. pl. banan, _Christ_, l. 66, etc.

l. 534. Insert, under eard-lufa (in Gloss.), earfoeth, st. n., _trouble,
difficulty, struggle_; acc. pl. earfeetho, 534.

l. 545 _seq._ "Five nights Beowulf and Breca kept together, not swimming,
but sailing in open boats (to swim the seas is to sail the seas), then
storm drove them asunder ... Breca is afterwards chief of the Brondings, a
tribe mentioned in _Widsith_. The story seems legendary, not
mythical."--Br., pp. 60, 61.

ll. 574-578. B. suggests swa þaer for hwaeethere, = _so there it befell me_.
But the word at l. 574 seems = _however_, and at l. 578 = _yet_; cf. l.
891; see S.; _Beit._ ix. 138; _Tidskr_. viii. 48; _Zacher_, iii. 387, etc.

l. 586. Gr. and Grundt. read fagum sweordum (no ic þaes fela gylpe!),
supplying fela and blending the broken half-lines into one. Ho. and Kl.
supply geflites.

l. 599. E. translates nyd-bade by _blackmail_; adding "ned bad, _toll_; ned
badere, _tolltaker_."--Land Charters, Gloss, v.

l. 601. MS. has ond = _and_ in three places only (601, 1149, 2041);
elsewhere it uses the symbol 7 = _and_.

l. 612. _seq._ Cf. the drinking ceremony at l. 1025. "The royal lady offers
the cup to Beowulf, not in his turn where he sate among the rest, but after
it has gone the round; her approach to Beowulf is an act apart."--E.

l. 620. "The [loving] cup which went the round of the company and was
tasted by all," like the Oriel and other college anniversary cups.--E.

l. 622. Cf. ll. 160, 1191, for the respective places of young and old.

l. 623. Cf. the circlet of gold worn by Wealhþeow at l. 1164.

l. 631. gyddode. Cf. Chaucer, _Prol._ l. 237 (ed. Morris):

    "Of _yeddynges_ he bar utterly the prys."

Cf. _giddy_.

l. 648. Kl. suggests a period after geþinged, especially as B. (_Tidskr_.
viii. 57) has shown that oþþe is sometimes = ond. Th. supplies ne.

l. 650. oþþe here and at ll. 2476, 3007, probably = _and_.

l. 651. Cf. 704, where sceadu-genga (the _night-ganger_ of _Leechdoms_, ii.
344) is applied to the demon.--E.

l. 659. Cf. l. 2431 for same formula, "to have and to hold" of the Marriage
Service.--E.

l. 681. B. considers þeah ... eal a precursor of Mod. Eng. _although_.

l. 682. godra = _advantages in battle_ (Gr.), _battle-skill_ (Ha.), _skill
in war_ (H.-So.). Might not nat be changed to nah = ne + ah (cf. l. 2253),
thus justifying the translation _ability_ (?) --_he has not the ability
to_, etc.

l. 695. Kl. reads hiera.--_Beit._ ix. 189. B. omits hie as occurring in the
previous hemistich.--_Beit._ xii. 89.

l. 698. "Here Destiny is a web of cloth."--E., who compares the Greek
Clotho, "spinster of fate." Women are also called "weavers of peace," as l.
1943. Cf. Kent's _Elene_, l. 88; _Widsieth_, l. 6, etc.

l. 711. B. translates þa by _when_ and connects with the preceding
sentences, thus rejecting the ordinary canto-division at l. 711. He objects
to the use of com as principal vb. at ll. 703, 711, and 721. (_Beit_, xii.)

l. 711. "Perhaps the Gnomic verse which tells of Thyrs, the giant, is
written with Grendel in the writer's mind,--þyrs sceal on fenne gewunian
ana inuan lande, _the giant shall dwell in the fen, alone in the land_
(Sweet's Read., p. 187)."--Br. p. 36.

l. 717. Dietrich, in _Haupt._ xi. 419, quotes from AElfric, _Hom._ ii. 498:
he beworhte þa bigelsas mid gyldenum laefrum, _he covered the arches with
gold-leaf_,--a Roman custom derived from Carthage. Cf. Mod. Eng. _oriel_ =
_aureolum_, a gilded room.--E. (quoting Skeat). Cf. ll. 2257, 1097, 2247,
2103, 2702, 2283, 333, 1751, for various uses of gold-sheets.

l. 720. B. and ten Br. suggest _hell-thane_ (Grendel) for heal-þegnas, and
make haele refer to Beowulf. Cf. l. 142.

l. 723. Z. reads [ge]hran.

l. 727. For this use of standan, cf. ll. 2314, 2770; and Vergil, _Ecl._ ii. 26:

    "Cum placidum ventis _staret_ mare."

l. 757. gedraeg. _Tumult_ is one of the meanings of this word. Here, appar.
= _occupation, lair_.

l. 759. R. reads modega for goda, "because the attribute cannot be
separated from the word modified unless the two alliterate."

l. 762. Cf. _Andreas_, l. 1537, for a similar use of ut = _off_.--E.

l. 769. The foreign words in _Beowulf_ (as ceaster-here) are not numerous;
others are (aside from proper names like _Cain, Abel_, etc.) deofol
(diabolus), candel (l. 1573), ancor (l. 303), scrifan (for- ge-), segn (l.
47), gigant (l. 113), mil- (l. 1363), straet (l. 320), ombeht (l. 287), gim
(l. 2073), etc.

l. 770. MS. reads cerwen, a word conceived by B. and others to be part of a
fem. compd.: -scerwen like -wenden in ed-wenden, -raeden, etc. (cf.
meodu-scerpen in _Andreas_, l. 1528); emended to -scerwen, _a great scare
under the figure of a mishap at a drinking-bout_; one might compare
bescerwan, _to deprive_, from bescyrian (Grein, i. 93), hence ealu-seerwen
would = _a sudden taking away, deprivation, of the beer_.--H.-So., p. 93.
See B., _Tidskr_. viii. 292.

l. 771. Ten Br. reads reethe, renhearde, = _raging, exceeding bold_.

l. 792. Instrumental adverbial phrases like aenige þinga, naenige þinga (_not
at all_), huru þinga (_especially_) are not infrequent. See Cook's Sievers'
Gram., p. 178; March, _A.-S. Gram._, p. 182.

l. 811. myrethe. E. translates _in wanton mood_. Toller-Bosw. does not
recognize _sorrow_ as one of the meanings of this word.

ll. 850, 851. S. reads deop for deog and erases semicolon after weol, =
_the death-stained deep welled with sword-gore_; cf. l. 1424. B. reads
deaeth-faeges deop, etc., = _the deep welled with the doomed one's
gore_.--_Beit._ xii. 89.

l. 857. The meaning of blaneum is partly explained by fealwe mearas below,
l. 866. Cf. Layamon's "and leop on his _blancke" = steed_, l. 23900; Kent's
_Elene_, l. 1185.

l. 859. Koerner, _Eng. Stud_. i. 482, regards the oft-recurring be saem
tweonum as a mere formula = _on earth_; cf. ll. 1298, 1686. tweone is part
of the separable prep. _between_; see be-. Cf. Baskerville's _Andreas_, l.
558.

l. 865. Cf. _Voyage of Ohthere and Wulfstan_ for an account of funeral
horse-racing, Sweet's Read., p. 22.

l. 868. See Ha., p. 31, for a variant translation.

l. 871 _seq._ R. considers this a technical description of improvised
alliterative verse, suggested by and wrought out on the spur of the moment.

l. 872. R. and B. propose secg[an], = _rehearse_, for secg, which suits the
verbs in the next two lines.

ll. 878-98. "It pleases me to think that it is in English literature we
possess the first sketch of that mighty saga [the Volsunga Saga = Waelsinges
gewin] which has for so many centuries engaged all the arts, and at last in
the hands of Wagner the art of music."--Br., p. 63. Cf. _Nibelung. Lied_,
l. 739.

l. 894. Intransitive verbs, as gan, weorethan, sometimes take habban, "to
indicate independent action."--Sw. Cf. hafaeth ... geworden, l. 2027.

l. 895. "brucan (_enjoy_) always has the genitive."--Sw.; cf. l. 895; acc.,
gen., instr., dat., according to March, _A.-S. Gram._, p. 151.

l. 898. Scherer proposes hate, = _from heat_, instr. of hat, _heat_; cf. l.
2606.

l. 901. he þaes aron þah = _he throve in honor_ (B.). Ten Br. inserts comma
after þah, making siethethan introduce a depend. clause.--_Beit._ viii. 568.
Cf. weoreth-myndum þah, l. 8; ll. 1155, 1243.--H.-So.

l. 902. Heremodes is considered by Heinzel to be a mere epithet = _the
valiant_; which would refer the whole passage to Sigmund (Sigfrid), the
eotenas, l. 903, being the Nibelungen. This, says H.-So., gets rid of the
contradiction between the good "Heremod" here and the bad one, l. 1710
_seq._--B. however holds fast to Heremod.--_Beit._ xii. 41. on feonda
geweald, l. 904,--_into the hands of devils_, says B.; cf. ll. 809, 1721,
2267; _Christ_, l. 1416; _Andreas_, l. 1621; for hine fyren onwod, cf.
_Gen._ l. 2579; Hunt's _Dan._ 17: hie wlenco anwod.

l. 902 _seq._ "Heremod's shame is contrasted with the glory of Sigemund,
and with the prudence, patience, generosity, and gentleness of Beowulf as a
chieftain."--Br., p. 66.

l. 906. MS. has lemede. Toller-Bosw. corrects to lemedon.

l. 917. Cf. Hunt's _Exod._, l. 170, for similar language.

l. 925. hos, G. hansa, _company_, "the word from which the mercantile
association of the 'Hanseatic' towns took their designation."--E.

l. 927. on staþole = _on the floor_ (B., Rask, ten Br.).--_Beit._ xii. 90.

l. 927. May not steapne here = _bright_, from its being immediately
followed by golde fahne? Cf. Chaucer's "his eyen _stepe_," _Prol._ l. 201
(ed. Morris); Cockayne's _Ste. Marherete_, pp. 9, 108; _St. Kath._, l.
1647.

l. 931. grynna may be for gyrnna (= _sorrows_), gen. plu. of gyrn, as
suggested by one commentator.

l. 937. B. (_Beit._ xii. 90) makes gehwylcne object of wid-scofen (haefde).
Gr. makes wea nom. absolute.

l. 940. scuccum: cf. G. scheuche, scheusal; Prov. Eng. _old-shock_; perhaps
the pop. interjection _O shucks!_ (!)

l. 959. H. explains we as a "plur. of majesty," which Beowulf throws off at
l. 964.

l. 963. feond þone fraetgan (B. _Beit._ xii. 90).

l. 976. synnum. "Most abstract words in the poetry have a very wide range
of meanings, diverging widely from the prose usage, synn, for instance,
means simply _injury, mischief, hatred_, and the prose meaning _sin_ is
only a secondary one; hata in poetry is not only _hater_, but _persecutor,
enemy_, just as nieth is both _hatred_ and _violence, strength_; heard is
_sharp_ as well as _hard_."--Sw.

l. 986. S. places waes at end of l. 985 and reads stiethra naegla, omitting
gehwylc and the commas after that and after sceawedon. _Beit._ ix. 138;
stedra (H.-So.); hand-sporu (H.-So.) at l. 987.

l. 986. Miller (_Anglia_, xii. 3) corrects to aeghwylene, in apposition to
fingras.

l. 987. hand-sporu. See _Anglia_, vii. 176, for a discussion of the
intrusion of u into the nom. of n-stems.

l. 988. Cf. ll. 2121, 2414, for similar use of unheoru = ungeheuer.

l. 992. B. suggests heatimbred for haten, and gefraetwon for -od; Kl.,
hroden (_Beit._ ix. 189).

l. 995, 996. Gold-embroidered tapestries seem to be meant by web =
_aurifrisium_.

l. 997. After þara þe = _of those that_, the depend, vb. often takes sg.
for pl.; cf. ll. 844, 1462, 2384, 2736.--Sw.; Dietrich.

l. 998. "Metathesis of l takes place in seld for setl, bold for botl,"
etc.--Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 96. Cf. Eng. proper names, _Bootle,
Battle_field, etc.--Skeat, _Principles_, i. 250.

l. 1000. heorras: cf. Chaucer, _Prol._ (ed. Morris) l. 550:

    "Ther was no dore that he nolde heve of _harre_."

ll. 1005-1007. See _Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 391, and _Beit._ xii. 368, for
R.'s and B.'s views of this difficult passage.

l. 1009. Cf. l. 1612 for sael and mael, surviving still in E. Anglia in "mind
your _seals and meals_," = _times and occasions_, i.e. have your wits about
you.--E.

ll. 1012, 1013. Cf. ll. 753, 754 for two similar comparatives used in
conjunction.

l. 1014. Cf. l. 327 for similar language.

ll. 1015, 1016. H.-So. puts these two lines in parentheses (fylle ...
þara). Cf. B., _Beit._ xii. 91.

l. 1024. One of the many famous swords spoken of in the poem. See Hrunting,
ll. 1458, 1660; Hunlafing, l. 1144, etc. Cf. Excalibur, Roland's sword, the
Nibelung Balmung, etc.

l. 1034. scur-heard. For an ingenious explanation of this disputed word see
Professor Pearce's article in _Mod. Lang. Notes_, Nov. 1, 1892, and ensuing
discussion.

l. 1039. eoderas is of doubtful meaning. H. and Toller-Bosw. regard the
word here = _enclosure, palings of the court_. Cf. _Caedmon_, ll. 2439,
2481. The passage throws interesting light on horses and their trappings

l. 1043. Grundt. emends wig to wicg, = _charger_; and E. quotes Tacitus,
_Germania_, 7.

l. 1044. "Power over each and both"; cf. "all and some," "one and all."

For Ingwin, see _List of Names_.

l. 1065. Gr. contends that fore here = de, _concerning, about_ (Ebert's
_Jahrb._, 1862, p. 269).

l. 1069. H.-So. supplies fram after eaferum, to govern it, = _concerning_
(?). Cf. _Fight at Finnsburg_, Appendix.

l. 1070. For the numerous names of the Danes, "bright-" "spear-" "east-"
"west-" "ring-" Danes, see these words.

l. 1073. Eotenas = _Finn's people, the Frisians_; cf. ll. 1089, 1142, 1146,
etc., and _Beit._ xii. 37. Why they are so called is not known.

l. 1084. R. proposes wiht Hengeste wieth gefeohtan (_Zachers Zeitschr._ iii.
394). Kl., wieth H. wiht gefeohtan.

ll. 1085 and 1099. wea-laf occurs in Wulfstan, _Hom._ 133, ed. Napier.--E.
Cf. daroetha laf, _Brunanb._, l. 54; ades lafe, _Phoenix_, 272 (Bright), etc.

l. 1098. elne unflitme = _so dass der eid (der inhalt des eides) nicht
streitig war_.--B., _Beit._ iii. 30. But cf. 1130, where Hengist and Finn
are again brought into juxtaposition and the expression ealles (?) unhlitme
occurs.

l. 1106. The pres. part. + be, as myndgiend waere here, is comparatively
rare in original A.-S. literature, but occurs abundantly in translations
from the Latin. The periphrasis is generally meaningless. Cf. l. 3029.

l. 1108. Koerner suggests ecge, = _sword_, in reference to a supposed old
German custom of placing ornaments, etc., on the point of a sword or spear
(_Eng. Stud._ i. 495). Singer, ince-gold = _bright gold_; B., andiege =
Goth, _andaugjo, evidently_. Cf. incge lafe, l. 2578. Possibly: and inge (=
_young men_) gold ahofon of horde. For inge, cf. Hunt's _Exod._ l. 190.

ll. 1115-1120. R. proposes (het þa ...) banfatu baernan ond on bael don,
earme on eaxe = _to place the arms in the ashes_, reading guethrec =
_battle-reek_, for -rinc (_Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 395). B., Sarrazin
(_Beit._ xi. 530), Lichtenfeld (_Haupts Zeitschr._ xvi. 330), C., etc.,
propose various emendations. See H.-So., p. 97, and _Beit._ viii. 568. For
guethrinc astah, cf. Old Norse, _stiga a bal_, "ascend the bale-fire."

l. 1116. sweoloethe. "On Dartmoor the burning of the furze up the hillsides
to let new grass grow, is called _zwayling_."--E. Cf. _sultry_, G.
_schwuel_, etc.

l. 1119. Cf. wudu-rec astah, l. 3145; and _Exod_. (Hunt), l. 450: waelmist
astah.

l. 1122. aetspranc = _burst forth, arose_ (omitted from the Gloss.), < aet +
springan.

l. 1130. R. and Gr. read elne unflitme, = _loyally and without contest_, as
at l. 1098. Cf. Ha., p. 39; H.-So., p. 97.

l. 1137. scacen = _gone_; cf. ll. 1125, 2307, 2728.

l. 1142. "The sons of the Eotenas" (B., _Beit._ xii. 31, who conjectures a
gap after 1142).

l. 1144. B. separates thus: Hun Lafing, = _Hun placed the sword Lafing_,
etc.--_Beit._ xii. 32; cf. R., _Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 396. Heinzel and
Homburg make other conjectures (Herrig's _Archiv_, 72, 374, etc.).

l. 1143. B., H.-So., and Moeller read: worod raedenne, þonne him Hun Lafing,
= _military brotherhood, when Hun laid upon his breast_ (the sword)
_Lafing_. There is a sword _Laufi, Loevi_ in the Norse sagas; but swords,
armor, etc., are often called the _leaving_ (laf) of files, hammers, etc.,
especially a precious heirloom; cf. ll. 454, 1033, 2830, 2037, 2629, 796,
etc., etc.

l. 1152. roden = _reddened_ (B., _Tidskr_. viii. 295).

l. 1160. For ll. 1069-1160, containing the Finn episode, cf. Moeller,
_Alteng. Volksepos_, 69, 86, 94; Heinzel, _Anz. f. dtsch. Altert._, 10,
226; B., _Beit._ xii. 29-37. Cf. _Widsieth_, l. 33, etc.

ll. 1160, 1161. leoeth (lied = _song, lay_) and gyd here appear synonyms.

ll. 1162-1165. "Behind the wars and tribal wanderings, behind the
contentions of the great, we watch in this poem the steady, continuous life
of home, the passions and thoughts of men, the way they talked and moved
and sang and drank and lived and loved among one another and for one
another."--Br., p. 18.

l. 1163. Cf. _wonderwork_. So _wonder-death, wonder-bidding,
wonder-treasure, -smith, -sight_, etc. at ll. 1748, 3038, 2174, 1682, 996,
etc. Cf. the German use of the same intensive, = _wondrous_, in
_wunder-schoen_, etc.

l. 1165. þa gyt points to some future event when "each" was not "true to
other," undeveloped in this poem, suhtor-gefaederan = Hroethgar and Hroethulf,
l. 1018. Cf. aethum-swerian, l. 84.

l. 1167 almost repeats l. 500, aet fotum, etc., where Unfereth is first
introduced.

l. 1191. E. sees in this passage separate seats for youth and middle-aged
men, as in English college halls, chapels, convocations, and churches
still.

l. 1192. ymbutan, _round about_, is sometimes thus separated: ymb hie utan;
cf. _Voyage of Ohthere_, etc. (Sw.), p. 18, l. 34, etc.; _Beowulf_, ll.
859, 1686, etc.

l. 1194. bewaegned, a [Greek: hapax legomenon], tr. _offered_ by Th.
Probably a p. p. waegen, made into a vb. by -ian, like _own, drown_, etc.
Cf. hafenian ( < hafen, < hebban), etc.

l. 1196. E. takes the expression to mean "mantle and its rings or
broaches." "Rail" long survived in Mid. Eng. (_Piers Plow_., etc.).

l. 1196. This necklace was afterwards given by Beowulf to Hygd, ll. 2173,
2174.

ll. 1199-1215. From the obscure hints in the passage, a part of the poem
may be approximately dated,--if Hygelac is the _Chochi-laicus_ of Gregory
of Tours, _Hist. Francorum_, iii. 3,--about A.D. 512-20.

l. 1200. The Breosinga men (Icel. _Brisinga men_) is the necklace of the
goddess Freya; cf. _Elder Edda, Hamarshemt_. Hama stole the necklace from
the Gothic King Eormenric; cf. _Traveller's Song_, ll. 8, 18, 88, 111. The
comparison of the two necklaces leads the poet to anticipate Hygelac's
history,--a suggestion of the poem's mosaic construction.

l. 1200. For Brosinga mene, cf. B., _Beit._ xii. 72. C. suggests fleah, =
_fled_, for fealh, placing semicolon after byrig, and making he subject of
fleah and geceas.

l. 1202. B. conjectures geceas ecne raed to mean _he became a pious man and
at death went to heaven_. Heime (Hama) in the _Thidrekssaga_ goes into a
cloister = to choose the better part (?). Cf. H.-So., p. 98. But cf.
Hroethgar's language to Beowulf, ll. 1760, 1761.

l. 1211. S. proposes feoh, = _property_, for feorh, which would be a
parallel for breost-gewaedu ... beah below.

l. 1213. E. remarks that in the _Laws of Cnut_, i. 26, the devil is called
se wodfreca werewulf, _the ravening werwolf_.

l. 1215. C. proposes heals-bege onfeng. _Beit._ viii. 570. For hrea- Kl.
suggests hrae-.

l. 1227. The son referred to is, according to Ettmueller, the one that
reigns after Hroethgar.

l. 1229. Kl. suggests si, = _be_, for _is_.

l. 1232. S. gives _wine-elated_ as the meaning of druncne.--_Beit._ ix.
139; Kl. _ibid_. 189, 194. But cf. _Judith_, ll. 67, 107.

l. 1235. Cf. l. 119 for similarity of language.

l. 1235. Kl. proposes gea-sceaft; but cf. l. 1267.

l. 1246. Ring armor was common in the Middle Ages. E. points out the
numerous forms of byrne in cognate languages,--Gothic, Icelandic, OHG.,
Slavonic, O. Irish, Romance, etc. Du Chaillu, _The Viking Age_, i. 126. Cf.
Murray's _Dict._ s. v.

l. 1248. anwig-gearwe = _ready for single combat_ (C.); but cf. Ha. p. 43;
_Beit._ ix. 210, 282.

l. 1252. Some consider this _fitt_ the beginning of Part (or Lay) II. of
the original epic, if not a separate work in itself.

l. 1254. K., W., and Ho. read farode = _wasted;_ Kolbing reads furode; but
cf. westen warode, l. 1266. MS. has warode.

ll. 1255-1258. This passage is a good illustration of the constant
parallelism of word and phrase characteristic of A.-S. poetry, and is
quoted by Sw. The changes are rung on ende and swylt, on gesyne and widcueth,
etc.

l. 1259. "That this story of Grendel's mother was originally a separate lay
from the first seems to be suggested by the fact that the monsters are
described over again, and many new details added, such as would be inserted
by a new singer who wished to enhance and adorn the original tale."--Br.,
p. 41.

l. 1259. Cf. l. 107, which also points to the ancestry of murderers and
monsters and their descent from "Cain."

l. 1261. The MS. has se þe, m.; changed by some to seo þe. At ll. 1393,
1395, 1498, Grendel's mother is referred to as m.; at ll. 1293, 1505,
1541-1546, etc., as f., the uncertain pronoun designating a creature female
in certain aspects, but masculine in demonic strength and
savageness.--H.-So.; Sw. p. 202. Cf. the masc. epithets at ll. 1380, 2137,
etc.

l. 1270. aglaeca = _Grendel_, though possibly referring to Beowulf, as at l.
1513.--Sw.

l. 1273. "It is not certain whether anwalda stands for onwealda, or whether
it should be read anwealda, = _only ruler_.--Sw.

l. 1279. The MS. has sunu þeod wrecan, which R. changes to sunu
þeod-wrecan, þeod- = _monstrous_; but why not regard þeod as opposition to
sunu, = _her son, the prince?_ See Sweet's Reader, and Koerner's discussion,
_Eng. Stud._ i. 500.

l. 1281. Ten Br. suggests (for sona) sara = _return of sorrows._

l. 1286. "geþuren (twice so written in MSS.) stands for geþruen, _forged_,
and is an isolated p. p."--Cook's Sievers' Gram., 209. But see Toller-Bosw.
for examples; Sw., Gloss.; March, p. 100, etc.

ll. 1292. þe hine = _whom;_ cf. ll. 441, 1437, 1292; _Heliand_, l. 1308.

l. 1298. be saem tweonum; cf. l. 1192; Hunt's _Exod_. l. 442; and Mod. Eng.
"to _us_-ward, etc.--Earle's _Philol._, p. 449. Cf. note, l. 1192.

l. 1301. C. proposes oether him aern = _another apartment was assigned him_.

l. 1303. B. conjectures under hrof genam; but Ha., p. 45, shows this to be
unnecessary, under also meaning _in_, as _in_ (or _under_) these
circumstances.

l. 1319. E. and Sw. suggest naegde or negde, _accosted_, < negan = Mid. Ger.
_nehwian_, pr. p. _nehwiandans, approach_. For hnaegan, _press down,
vanquish_, see ll. 1275, 1440, etc.

l. 1321. C. suggests nead-laethum for neod-laethu, _after crushing hostility_;
but cf. freond-laethu, l. 1193.

l. 1334. K. and ten Br. conjecture gefaegnod = _rejoicing in her fill_, a
parallel to aese wlanc, l. 1333.

l. 1340. B. translates: "and she has executed a deed of blood-vengeance of
far-reaching consequence."--_Beit._ xii. 93.

l. 1345. B. reads geo for eow (_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 205).

ll. 1346-1377. "This is a fine piece of folk-lore in the oldest extant
form.... The authorities for the story are the rustics (ll. 1346, 1356)."
--E.

l. 1347. Cf. sele-raedende at l. 51.

l. 1351. "The ge [of gewitan] may be merely a scribal error,--a repetition
(dittography) of the preceding ge of gewislicost."--Sw.

l. 1352. ides, like firas, _men_, etc., is a poetic word supposed by Grimm
to have been applied, like Gr. [Greek: numphae], to superhuman or
semi-divine women.

ll. 1360-1495 _seq._ E. compares this Dantesque tarn and scenery with the
poetical accounts of _AEneid_, vii. 563; _Lucretius_, vi. 739, etc.

l. 1360. firgenstream occurs also in the _Phoenix_ (Bright, p. 168) l. 100;
_Andreas_, ll. 779, 3144 (K.); _Gnomic Verses_, l. 47, etc.

l. 1363. The genitive is often thus used to denote measure = by or in
miles; cf. l. 3043; and contrast with partitive gen. at l. 207.

l. 1364. The MS. reads hrinde = hrinende (?), which Gr. adopts; K. and Th.
read hrinde-bearwas; hringde, _encircling_ (Sarrazin, _Beit._ xi. 163);
hrimge = _frosty_ (Sw.); _with frost-whiting covered_ (Ha.). See Morris,
_Blickling Hom_., Preface, vi., vii.

l. 1364. Cf. Ruin, hrimige edoras behrofene, _rimy, roofless halls_.

l. 1366. niethwundor may = nieth- (as in nieth-sele, _q. v._) wundor, _wonder of
the deep_.

l. 1368. The personal pronoun is sometimes omitted in subordinate and even
independent clauses; cf. wite here; and Hunt's _Exod_., l. 319.

l. 1370. hornum. Such "datives of manner or respect" are not infrequent
with adj.

l. 1371. "seleeth is not dependent on aer, for in that case it would be in the
subjunctive, but aer is simply an adverb, correlative with the conjunction
aer in the next line: 'he will (sooner) give up his life, before he will,'
etc."--Sw.

l. 1372. Cf. ll. 318 and 543 for willan with similar omitted inf.

l. 1373. heafola is found only in poetry.--Sw. It occurs thirteen or
fourteen times in this poem. Cf. the poetic gamol, swat (l. 2694), etc.,
for eald, blod.

l. 1391. uton: hortatory subj. of witan, _go_, = _let us go;_ cf. French
_allons_, Lat. _eamus_, Ital. _andiamo_, etc. + inf. Cf. ll. 2649, 3102.

l. 1400. H. is dat. of person indirectly affected, = advantage.

l. 1402. geatolic probably = _in his equipments_, as B. suggests (_Beit._
xii. 83), comparing searolic.

ll. 1402, 1413 reproduce the wk. form of the pret. of gan (Goth,
_gaggida_). Cf. _Andreas_, l. 1096, etc.

l. 1405. S. (_Beit._ ix. 140) supplies [þaer heo] gegnum for; B. (_ibid._
xii. 14) suggests hwaer heo.

l. 1411. B., Gr., and E. take an-paethas = paths wide enough for only one,
like Norwegian _einstig_; cf. stige nearwe, just above. _Trail_ is the
meaning. Cf. enge anpaethas, uncueth gelad, _Exod._ (Hunt), l. 58.

l. 1421. Cf. oncyeth, l. 831. The whole passage (ll. 1411-1442) is replete
with suggestions of walrus-hunting, seal-fishing, harpooning of sea-animals
(l. 1438), etc.

l. 1425. E. quotes from the 8th cent. Corpus Gloss., "_Falanx_ foeetha."

l. 1428. For other mention of nicors, cf. ll. 422, 575, 846. E. remarks,
"it survives in the phrase 'Old Nick' ... a word of high authority ...
Icel. _nykr_, water-goblin, Dan. _noek, nisse_, Swed. _naecken_, G. _nix,
nixe_, etc." See Skeat, _Nick._

l. 1440. Sw. reads gehnaeged, _prostrated_, and regards nietha as gen. pl.
"used instrumentally," = _by force._

l. 1441. -bora = _bearer, stirrer;_ occurs in other compds., as mund-,
raed-, waeg-bora.

l. 1447. him = _for him_, a remoter dative of reference.--Sw.

l. 1455. Gr. reads brondne, = _flaming_.

l. 1457. leon is the inf. of lah; cf. onlah (< onleon) at l. 1468. lihan
was formerly given as the inf.; cf. laene = laehne.

l. 1458. Cf. the similar dat. of possession as used in Latin.

l. 1458. H.-So. compares the Icelandic saga account of Grettir's battle
with the giant in the cave. haeft-mece may be = Icel. _heptisax_ (_Anglia_,
iii. 83), "hip-knife."

l. 1459. "The sense seems to be 'pre-eminent among the old treasures.' ...
But possibly foran is here a prep. with the gen.: 'one before the old
treasures.'".--Sw. For other examples of foran, cf. ll. 985, 2365.

l. 1460. ater-tearum = _poison-drops_ (C., _Beit._ viii. 571; S., _ibid_.
xi. 359).

l. 1467. þaet, comp. relative, = _that which_; "we testify _that_ we do
know."

l. 1480. foreth-gewitenum is in appos. to me, = _mihi defuncto_.--M.
Callaway, _Am. Journ. of Philol._, October, 1889.

l. 1482. nime. Conditional clauses of doubt or future contingency take gif
or buton with subj.; cf. ll. 452, 594; of fact or certainty, the ind.; cf.
ll. 442, 447, 527, 662, etc. For buton, cf. ll. 967, 1561.

l. 1487. "findan sometimes has a preterit funde in W. S. after the manner
of the weak preterits."--Cook's Sievers' Cram., p, 210.

l. 1490. Kl. reads wael-sweord, = _battle-sword_.

l. 1507. "This cave under the sea seems to be another of those natural
phenomena of which the writer had personal knowledge (ll. 2135, 2277), and
which was introduced by him into the mythical tale to give it a local
color. There are many places of this kind. Their entrance is under the
lowest level of the tide."--Br., p. 45.

l. 1514. B. (_Beit._ xii. 362) explains niethsele, hrofsele as _roof-covered
hall in the deep_; cf. Grettir Saga (_Anglia_, iii. 83).

l. 1538. Sw., R., and ten Br. suggest feaxe for eaxle, = _seized by the
hair_.

l. 1543. and-lean (R.); cf. l. 2095. The MS. has hand-lean.

l. 1546. Sw. and S. read seax.--_Beit._ ix. 140.

l. 1557. H.-So. omits comma and places semicolon after yethelice; Sw. and S.
place comma after gesced.

l. 1584. oether swylc = _another fifteen_ (Sw.); = _fully as many_ (Ha.).

ll. 1592-1613 _seq._ Cf. _Anglia_, iii; 84 (Grettir Saga).

l. 1595. blondenfeax = _grizzly-haired_ (Bright, Reader, p. 258); cf.
_Brunanb._, l. 45 (Bright).

l. 1599. geweareth, impers. vb., = _agree, decide = many agreed upon this,
that_, etc. (Ha., p. 55; cf. ll. 2025-2027, 1997; B., _Beit._ xii. 97).

l. 1605. C. supposes wiston = wiscton = _wished_.--_Beit._ viii. 571.

l. 1607. broden mael is now regarded as a comp. noun, = _inlaid or
damascened sword_.--W., Ho.

l. 1611. wael-rapas = _water-ropes = bands of frost_ (l. 1610) (?). Possibly
the Prov. Eng. weele, _whirlpool_. Cf. wael, _gurges_, Wright, Voc., _Gnom.
Verses_, l. 39.--E.

l. 1611. waegrapas (Sw.) = _wave-bands_ (Ha.).

l. 1622. B. suggests eatna = eotena, eardas, _haunts of the giants_
(Northumbr. ea for eo).

l. 1635. cyning-holde (B., _Beit._ xii. 369); cf. l. 290.

l. 1650. H., Gr., and Ettmueller understand idese to refer to the queen.

l. 1651. Cf. _Anglia_, iii. 74, _Beit._ xi. 167, for coincidences with the
Grettir Saga (13th cent.).

l. 1657. Restore MS. reading wigge in place of wige.

l. 1664. B. proposes eotenise ... este for eacen ... oftost, omitting
brackets (_Zackers Zeitschr._ iv. 206). G. translates _mighty ... often_.

l. 1675. ondraedan. "In late texts the final n of the preposition on is
frequently lost when it occurs in a compound word or stereotyped phrase,
and the prefix then appears as a: abutan, amang, aweg, aright,
adr'aedan."--Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 98.

ll. 1680-1682. Giants and their work are also referred to at ll. 113, 455,
1563, 1691, etc.

l. 1680. Cf. ceastra ... orethanc enta geweorc, _Gnomic Verses_, l. 2;
Sweet's Reader, p. 186.

ll. 1687-1697. "In this description of the writing on the sword, we see the
process of transition from heathen magic to the notions of Christian times
.... The history of the flood and of the giants ... were substitutes for
names of heathen gods, and magic spells for victory."--E. Cf. Mohammedan
usage.

ll. 1703, 1704. þaet þe eorl naere geboren betera (B., _Tidskr._ 8, 52).

l. 1715. ana hwearf = _he died solitary and alone_ (B., _Beit._ xii. 38); =
_lonely_ (Ha.); = _alone_ (G.).

l. 1723. leod-bealo longsum = _eternal hell-torment_ (B., _Beit._ xii. 38,
who compares _Ps. Cott._ 57, lif longsum).

l. 1729. E. translates on lufan, _towards possession_; Ha., _to
possessions_.

l. 1730. modgeþonc, like lig, sae, segn, niht, etc., is of double gender
(m., n. in the case of modgeþ.).

l. 1741. The doctrine of nemesis following close on [Greek: hubris], or
overweening pride, is here very clearly enunciated. The only protector
against the things that "assault and hurt" the soul is the "Bishop and
Shepherd of our souls" (l. 1743).

l. 1745 appears dimly to fore-shadow the office of the evil archer Loki,
who in the Scandinavian mythology shoots Balder with a mistletoe twig. The
language closely resembles that of Psalm 64.

l. 1748. Kl. regards wom = wo(u)m; cf. woh-bogen, l. 2828. See Gloss., p.
295, under wam. Contrast the construction of bebeorgan a few lines below
(l. 1759), where the dat. and acc. are associated.

l. 1748. See Cook's Sievers' Gram., p. 167, for declension of woh, _wrong_
= gen. wos or woges, dat. wo(u)m, etc.; pl. gen. wora, dat. wo(u)m, etc.;
and cf. declension of heah, hreoh, ruh, etc.

l. 1748. wergan gastes; cf. _Blickl. Hom._ vii.; _Andreas_, l. 1171. "_Auld
Wearie_ is used in Scotland, or was used a few years ago, ... to mean the
devil."--E. Bede's _Eccles. Hist._ contains (naturally) many examples of
the expression = devil.

l. 1750. on gyld = _in reward_ (B. _Beit._ xii. 95); Ha. translates
_boastfully_; G., _for boasting_; Gr., _to incite to boastfulness_. Cf.
_Christ_, l. 818.

l. 1767. E. thinks this an allusion to the widespread superstition of the
evil eye (_mal occhio, mauvais aeil_). Cf. Vergil, _Ecl._ iii. 103. He
remarks that Pius IX., Gambetta, and President Carnot were charged by their
enemies with possessing this weapon.

l. 1784. wigge geweorethad (MS. wigge weorethad) is C.'s conjecture; cf.
_Elene_, l. 150. So G., _honored in war_.

l. 1785. The future generally implied in the present of beon is plainly
seen in this line; cf. ll. 1826, 661, 1830, 1763, etc.

l. 1794. Some impers. vbs. take acc. (as here, Geat) of the person
affected; others (as þyncan) take the dat. of the person, as at ll. 688,
1749, etc. Cf. verbs of dreaming, being ashamed, desiring, etc.--March,
A.-S. Gram., p. 145.

l. 1802. E. remarks that the blaca hrefn here is a bird of good omen, as
opposed to se wonna hrefn of l. 3025. The raven, wolf, and eagle are the
regular epic accompaniments of battle and carnage. Cf. ll. 3025-3028;
_Maldon_, 106; _Judith_, 205-210, etc.

l. 1803. S. emends to read: "then came the light, going bright after
darkness: the warriors," etc. Cf. Ho., p. 41, l. 23. G. puts period before
"the warriors." For onettan, cf. Sw.'s Gloss, and Bright's Read., Gloss.

ll. 1808-1810. Muellenh. and Grundt. refer se hearda to Beowulf, correct
sunu (MS.) to suna Ecglafes (i.e. Unferth); [_he_] (Beo.) _thanked him_
(Un.) _for the loan_. Cf. ll. 344, 581, 1915.

ll. 1823-1840. "Beowulf departing pledges his services to Hroethgar, to be
what afterwards in the mature language of chivalry was called his 'true
knight'"--E.

l. 1832. Kl. corrects to dryhtne, in appos. with Higelace.

l. 1835 gar-holt more properly means _spear-shaft_; cf. aesc-holt.

l. 1855. sel = _better_ (Grundt.; B., _Beit._ xii. 96), instead of MS. wel.

ll. 1855-1866. "An ideal picture of international amity according to the
experience and doctrine of the eighth century."--E.

l. 1858. S. and Kl. correct to gemaene, agreeing with sib.--_Beit._ ix. 140,
190.

l. 1862. "The gannet is a great diver, plunging down into the sea from a
considerable height, such as forty feet."--E.

l. 1863. Kl. suggests heafu, = _seas_.

l. 1865. B. proposes geþohte, = _with firm thought_, for geworhte; cf. l.
611.

l. 1876. geseon = _see again_ (Kl., _Beit._ ix. 190). S. and B. insert na
to modify geseon and explain Hroethgar's tears. Ha. and G. follow Heyne's
text. Cf. l. 567.

l. 1881. Is beorn here = bearn (be-arn?) of l. 67? or more likely = born,
barn, = _burned?_--S., Th.

l. 1887. orleahtre is a _[Greek: hapax legomenon]_. E. compares Tennyson's
"blameless" king. Cf. also ll. 2015, 2145; and the god cyning of l. 11.

l. 1896. scaethan = _warriors_ (cf. l. 1804) has been proposed by C.; but cf.
l. 253.

l. 1897. The boat had been left, at ll. 294-302, in the keeping of
Hroethgar's men; at l. 1901 the bat-weard is specially honored by Beowulf
with a sword and becomes a "sworded squire."--E. This circumstance appears
to weld the poem together. Cf. also the speed of the journey home with ymb
an-tid oþres dogores of l. 219, and the similarity of language in both
passages (famig-heals, clifu, naessas, saelde, brim, etc.).--The nautical
terms in Beowulf would form an interesting study.

l. 1904. R. proposes, gewat him on naca, = _the vessel set out_, on
alliterating as at l. 2524 (_Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 402). B. reads on
nacan, but inserts irrelevant matter (_Beit._ xii. 97).

l. 1913. Cf. the same use of ceol, = _ship_, in the _A.-S. Chron._, ed.
Earle-Plummer; _Gnomic Verses_, etc.

l. 1914. S. inserts þaet he before on lande.

l. 1916. B. makes leofra manna depend on wlatode, = _looked for the dear
men ready at the coast_ (_Beit._ xii. 97).

l. 1924. Gr., W., and Ho. propose wunade, = _remained;_ but cf. l. 1929. S.
conceives ll. 1924, 1925 as "direct speech" (_Beit._ ix. 141).

l. 1927 _seq._ "The women of Beowulf are of the fine northern type; trusted
and loved by their husbands and by the nobles and people; generous, gentle,
and holding their place with dignity."--Br., p. 67. Thrytho is the
exception, l. 1932 _seq._

l. 1933. C. suggests frecnu, = _dangerous, bold_, for Thrytho could not be
called "excellent." G. writes "Modthrytho" as her name. The womanly Hygd
seems purposely here contrasted with the terrible Thrytho, just as, at l.
902 _seq._, Sigemund and Heremod are contrasted. For Thrytho, etc., cf.
Gr., _Jahrb. fuer rom. u. eng. Lit._ iv. 279; Muellenhoff, _Haupts Zeitschr._
xiv. 216; Matthew Paris; Suchier, _Beit._ iv. 500-521; R. _Zachers
Zeitschr._ iii. 402; B., _ibid._ iv. 206; Koerner, _Eng. Stud._ i. 489-492;
H.-So., p. 106.

l. 1932-1963. K. first pointed out the connection between the historical
Offa, King of Mercia, and his wife Cwendrida, and the Offa and Þryetho (Gr.'s
_Drida_ of the _Vita Offae Secundi_) of the present passage. The tale is
told of her, not of Hygd.

l. 1936. Suchier proposes andaeges, = _eye to eye_; Leo proposes andaeges, =
_the whole day_; G., _by day_. No change is necessary if an be taken to
govqern hire, = _on her_, and daeges be explained (like nihtes, etc.) as a
genitive of time, = _by day_.

l. 1943. R. and Suchier propose onsece, = _seek, require_; but cf. 2955.

l. 1966. Cf. the _heofoncandel_ of _Exod_. l. 115 (Hunt). Shak.'s 'night's
candles.'

l. 1969. Cf. l. 2487 _seq._ for the actual slayer of Ongenþeow, i.e. Eofor,
to whom Hygelac gave his only daughter as a reward, l. 2998.

l. 1981. meodu-scencum = _with mead-pourers_ or _mead-cups_ (G., Ha.);
_draught or cup of mead_ (Toller-Bosw.).

l. 1982. K., Th., W., H. supply [heal-]reced; Holler [hea-].

l. 1984. B. defends the MS., reading hae nu (for haeethnu), which he regards as
= Heinir, the inhabitants of the Jutish "heaths" (haeeth). Cf. H.-So., p. 107;
_Beit._ xii. 9.

l. 1985. sinne. "In poetry there is a reflexive possessive of the third
person, sin (declined like min). It is used not only as a true reflexive,
but also as a non-reflexive (= Lat. _ejus_)"--Sw.; Cook's Sievers' Gram.,
p. 185. Cf. ll. 1508, 1961, 2284, 2790.

l. 1994. Cf. l. 190 for a similar use of seaeth; cf. to "glow" with emotion,
"boil" with indignation, "burn" with anger, etc. weallan is often so used;
cf. ll. 2332, 2066, etc.

l. 2010. B. proposes facne, = _in treachery_, for fenne. Cf. _Juliana_, l.
350; _Beit._ xii. 97.

l. 2022. Food of specific sorts is rarely, if at all, mentioned in the
poem. Drink, on the other hand, occurs in its primitive varieties,--_ale_
(as here: ealu-waeg), _mead, beer, wine, lieth_ (cider? Goth. _leiþus_, Prov.
Ger. _leit-_ in _leit-haus_, ale-house), etc.

l. 2025. Kl. proposes is for waes.

l. 2027. Cf. l. 1599 for a similar use of weorethan, = _agree, be pleased
with_ (Ha.); _appear_ (Sw., Reader, 6th ed.).

ll. 2030, 2031. Ten Br. proposes: oft seldan ( = _gave_) waere aefter
leod-hryre: lytle hwile bongar bugeeth, þeah seo bryd duge = _oft has a
treaty been given after the fall of a prince: but little while the
murder-spear resteth, however excellent the bride be._ Cf. Kl., _Beit._ ix.
190; B., _Beit._ xii. 369; R., _Zachers Zeitschr._ in. 404; Ha., p. 69; G.,
p. 62.

l. 2036. Cf. Kl, _Beit._ ix. 191; R., _Zachers Zeitschr._ iii. 404.

l. 2042. For beah B. reads ba, = _both_, i.e. Freaware and the Dane.

l. 2063. Thorkelin and Conybeare propose wigende, = _fighting_, for
lifigende.

l. 2068. W.'s edition begins section xxx. (not marked in the MS.) with this
line. Section xxxix. (xxxviii. in copies A and B, xxxix. in Thorkelin) is
not so designated in the MS., though þa (at l. 2822) is written with
capitals and xl. begins at l. 2893.

l. 2095. Cf. l. 1542, and note.

l. 2115 _seq._ B. restores thus:

                      Þaer on innan giong
    niethetha nathwylc,      neode to gefeng
    haeethnum horde;      hond aetgenam
    seleful since fah;      ne he þaet syethethan ageaf,
    þeah þe he slaepende      besyrede hyrde
    þeofes craefte:       þaet se þioden onfand,
    by-folc beorna,       þaet he gebolgen waes.

--_Beit._ xii. 99; _Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 210.

l. 2128. aetbaer here = _bear away_, not given in the Gloss.

l. 2129. B. proposes faerunga, = _suddenly_, for Gr.'s reading in the
text.--_Beit._ xii. 98.

l. 2132. MS. has þine life, which Leo translates _by thy leave_ (= ON.
_leyfi_); B., _by thy life_.--_Beit._ xii. 369.

l. 2150. B. renders gen, etc., by "now I serve thee alone again as my
gracious king" (_Beit._ xii. 99).

l. 2151. The forms hafu [hafo], hafast, hafaeth, are poetic archaisms.--Sw.

l. 2153. Kl. proposes ealdor, = _prince_, for eafor. W. proposes the compd.
eafor-heafodsegn, = _helm_; cf. l. 1245.

l. 2157. The wk. form of the adj. is frequent in the vocative, especially
when postponed: "Beowulf leofa," l. 1759. So, often, in poetry in nom.:
wudu selesta, etc.

l. 2158. aerest is possibly the verbal subs. from arisan, _to arise, =
arising, origin_. R. suggested aerist, _arising, origin_. Cf. Bede, _Eccles.
Hist._, ed. Miller, where the word is spelt as above, but = (as usual)
_resurrection_. See Sweet, Reader, p. 211; E.-Plummer's _Chronicle_, p.
302, etc. The MS. has est. See Ha., p. 73; S., _Beit._ x. 222; and cf. l.
2166.

l. 2188. Gr., W., H. supply [wen]don, = _weened_, instead of Th.'s [oft
saeg]don.

l. 2188. The "slack" Beowulf, like the sluggish Brutus, ultimately reveals
his true character, and is presented with a historic sword of honor. It is
"laid on his breast" (l. 2195) as Hun laid Lafing on Hengest's breast, l.
1145.

l. 2188. "The boy was at first slothful, and the Geats thought him an
unwarlike prince, and long despised him. Then, like many a lazy third son
in the folk tales, a change came, he suddenly showed wonderful daring and
was passionate for adventure."--Br., p. 22.

l. 2196. "Seven of thousands, manor and lordship" (Ha.). Kl., _Beit._ ix.
191, thinks with Ettm. that þusendo means a hide of land (see Schmid, _Ges.
der Angl_, 610), Bede's familia = 1/2 sq. meter; seofan being used (like
hund, l. 2995) only for the alliteration.

l. 2196. "A vast Honour of 7000 hides, a mansion, and a judgment-seat"
[throne].--E.

l. 2210. MS. has the more correct wintra.

l. 2211. Cf. similar language about the dragon at l. 100. Beowulf's
"jubilee" is fitly solemnized by his third and last dragon-fight.

l. 2213. B. proposes se þe on hearge haeethen hord beweotode; cf. Ha., p. 75.

l. 2215. "The dragon lies round the treasures in a cave, as Fafnir, like a
Python, lay coiled over his hoard. So constant was this habit among the
dragons that gold is called Worms' bed, Fafnir's couch, Worms' bed-fire.
Even in India, the cobras ... are guardians of treasure."--Br., p. 50.

l. 2216. neode. E. translates _deftly_; Ha., _with ardor_. H.-So. reads
neode, = _with desire, greedily_, instr. of neod.

l. 2223. E. begins his "Part Third" at this point as he begins "Part
Second" at l. 1252, each dragon-fight forming part of a trilogy.

ll. 2224, 2225. B. proposes: nealles mid gewealdum wyrmes weard gaest sylfes
willum.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 211; _Beit._ xii. 100.

l. 2225. For þeow read þegn.--K. and Z.

l. 2225. þeow, st. m., _slave, serf_ (not in H.-So.).

l. 2227. For ofer-þearfe read aernes þearfa.--Z.

ll. 2229-2231. B. proposes:

    secg synbysig      sona onwlatode,
    þeah þam gyste      gryrebroga stod,
    hwaeethre earmsceapen      innganges þearfa
       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
    feasceapen,      þa hyne se faer begeat.
                     --_Beit._ xii. 101. Cf. Ha., p. 69.

l. 2232. W. suggests seah or seir for geseah, and Gr. suggests searolic.

l. 2233. Z. surmises eoreth-huse (for -scraefe).

l. 2241. B. proposes laen-gestreona, = _transitory_, etc.; Th., R. propose
leng (= _longer_) gestreona; S. accepts the text but translates "the
long accumulating treasure."

l. 2246. B. proposed (1) hard-fyndne, = _hard to find_; (2) hord-wynne
dael,--_a deal of treasure-joy_ (cf. l. 2271).--_Zachers Zeitschr._
iv. 211; _Beit._ xii. 102.

l. 2247. fecword = _banning words_ (?) MS. has fec.

l. 2254. Others read feor-[mie], = _furbish_, for fetige: _I own not one
who may_, etc.

l. 2261. The Danes themselves were sometimes called the "Ring-Danes,"
= clad in ringed (or a ring of) armor, or possessing rings. Cf.
ll. 116, 1280.

l. 2264. Note the early reference to hawking. Minstrelsy (hearpan
wyn), saga-telling, racing, swimming, harpooning of sea-animals, feasting,
and the bestowal of jewels, swords, and rings, are the other amusements
most frequent in _Beowulf_.

l. 2264. Cf. _Maldon_, ll. 8, 9, for a reference to hawking.

l. 2276. Z. suggests swyethe ondraedaeth; Ho. puts gesecean for Gr.'s
gewunian.

l. 2277. Z. and K. read: hord on hrusan. "Three hundred winters,"
at l. 2279, is probably conventional for "a long time," like hund
missera, l. 1499; hund þusenda, l. 2995; þritig (of Beowulf's strength), l.
379; þritig (of the men slain by Grendel), l. 123; seofan þusendo, l. 2196,
etc.

l. 2285. B. objects to hord as repeated in ll. 2284, 2285; but cf. Ha., p.
77. C. prefers sum to hord. onboren = _inminutus_; cf. B., _Beit._ xii.
102.

l. 2285. onberan is found also at line 991, = _carry off_, with on- = E.
_un--(un-bind, -loose, -tie_, etc.), G. _ent-_. The negro still pronounces
_on-do_, etc.

l. 2299. Cf. H.-So., p. 112, for a defense of the text as it stands. B.
proposes "nor was there any man in that desert who rejoiced in conflict,"
etc. So ten Br.

l. 2326. B. and ten Br,. propose ham, = _home_, for him.--_Beit._ xii. 103.

l. 2335. E. translates ealond utan by _the sea-board front, the
water-washed land on the (its) outside_. See B., _Beit._ xii. 1, 5.

l. 2346. Cf. l. 425, where Beowulf resolves to fight the dragon
single-handed. E. compares _Guy of Warwick_, ll. 49, 376.

l. 2355. Ten Br. proposes laethan cynne as apposition to maegum.

l. 2360. Cf. Beowulf's other swimming-feat with Breca, ll. 506 _seq._

l. 2362. Gr. inserts ana, = _lone-going_, before xxx.: approved by B.; and
Krueger, _Beit._ ix. 575. Cf. l. 379.

l. 2362. "Beowulf has the strength of thirty men in the original tale.
Here, then, the new inventor makes him carry off thirty coats of
mail."--Br., p. 48.

l. 2364. Hetware = Chattuarii, a nation allied against Hygelac in his
Frisian expedition; cf. ll. 1208 _seq._, 2917, etc.

l. 2368. B. proposes _quiet sea_ as trans, of sioleetha bigong, and compares
Goth. _anasilan_, to be still; Swed. dial, _sil_, still water between
waterfalls.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 214.

l. 2380. hyne--Heardred; so him, l. 2358.

l. 2384. E. calls attention to Swio-rice as identical with the modern
_Sverige_ = Sweden; cf. l. 2496.

l. 2386. Gr. reads on feorme, = _at the banquet_; cf. Moeller, _Alteng.
Volksepos_, 111, who reads (f)or feorme. The MS. has or.

l. 2391. Cf. l. 11.

l. 2394. B., Gr., and Mullenh. understand ll. 2393-2397 to mean that
Eadgils, Ohthere's son, driven from Sweden, returns later, supported by
Beowulf, takes the life of his uncle Onela, and probably becomes himself
O.'s successor and king of Sweden. For another view see H.-So., p. 115. MS.
has freond (l. 2394), which Leo, etc., change to feond. G. translates
_friend_.--_Beit._ xii. 13; _Anzeiger f. d. Altert_. iii. 177.

l. 2395. Eadgils is Ohthere's son; cf. l. 2381; Onela is Ohthere's brother;
cf. ll. 2933, 2617.

l. 2402. "Twelfsome"; cf. "fifteensome" at l. 207, etc. As _Beowulf_ is
essentially _the_ Epic of Philanthropy, of the true love of man, as
distinguished from the ordinary love-epic, the number twelve in this
passage may be reminiscent of another Friend of Man and another Twelve. In
each case all but one desert the hero.

l. 2437. R. proposes styred, = _ordered, decreed_, for stred.--_Zachers
Zeitschr._ iii. 409.

l. 2439. B. corrects to freo-wine = _noble friend_, asking, "How can
Herebeald be called Haeethcyn's frea-wine [MS.], _lord?_"

l. 2442. feohleas gefeoht, "a homicide which cannot be atoned for by
money--in this case an unintentional fratricide."--Sw.

l. 2445. See Ha., pp. 82, 83, for a discussion of ll. 2445-2463. Cf. G., p.
75.

l. 2447. MS. reads wrece, justified by B. (_Tidskr_. viii. 56). W.
conceives wrece as optative or hortative, and places a colon before þonne.

l. 2449. For helpan read helpe.--K., Th., S. (_Zeitschr. f. D. Phil._ xxi.
3, 357).

ll. 2454-2455. (1) Muellenh. (_Haupts Zeitschr._ xiv. 232) proposes:

                    þonne se an hafaeth
    þurh daeda nyd      deaethes gefandod.

(2) B. proposes:

    þurh daeda nieth      deaethes gefondad.
       --_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 215.

l. 2458. Cf. sceotend, pl., ll. 704, 1155, like ridend. Cf. _Judith_, l.
305, etc.

l. 2474. Th. considers the "wide water" here as the Maelar lake, the
boundary between Swedes and Goths.

l. 2477. On oþþe = _and_, cf. B., _Tidskr_. viii. 57. See Ha., p. 83.

l. 2489. B. proposes hrea-blac for Gr.'s heoro-.--_Tikskr_. viii. 297.

l. 2494. S. suggests eethel-wynne.

l. 2502. E. translates for dugeethum, _of my prowess_; so Ettmueller.

ll. 2520-2522. Gr. and S. translate, "if I knew how else I might combat the
monster's boastfulness."--Ha., p. 85.

l. 2524. and-hattres is H.'s invention. Gr. reads oreethes and attres, _blast
and venom_. Cf. orueth, l. 2558, and l. 2840 (where attor- also occurs).

l. 2526. E. quotes fleon fotes trym from _Maldon_, l. 247.

l. 2546. Gr., H.-So., and Ho. read standan stan-bogan (for stod on
stan-bogan) depending on geseah.

l. 2550. Grundt. and B. propose deor, _brave one_, i.e. Beowulf, for deop.

L. 2565. MS. has ungleaw (K., Th.), unglaw (Grundt.). B. proposes unslaw, =
_sharp_.--_Beit._ xii. 104. So H.-So., Ha., p. 86.

ll. 2570, 2571. (1) May not gescife (MS. to gscipe) = German _schief_,
"crooked," "bent," "aslant," and hence be a parallel to gebogen, _bent,
coiled?_ cf. l. 2568, þa se wyrm gebeah snude tosomne, and l. 2828. Coiled
serpents spring more powerfully for the coiling. (2) Or perhaps destroy
comma after to and read gescaepe, = _his fate_; cf. l. 26: him þa Scyld
gewat to gescaep-hwile. G. appar. adopts this reading, p. 78.

l. 2589. grund-wong = _the field_, not _the earth_ (so B.); H.-So., _cave_,
as at l. 2771. So Ha., p. 87.

l. 2595. S. proposes colon after stefne.--_Beit._ ix. 141.

l. 2604. Muellenh. explains leod Scylfinga in _Anzeiger f. d. Altert._ iii.
176-178.

l. 2607. are = _possessions, holding_ (Kl., _Beit._ ix. 192; Ha., p. 88).

l. 2609. folcrihta. Add "folk-right" to the meanings in the Gloss.; and cf.
eethel-, land-riht, word-riht.

l. 2614. H.-So. reads with Gr. wraeccan wineleasum Weohstan bana, = _whom, a
friendless exile, W. had slain_.

ll. 2635-61. E. quotes Tacitus, _Germania_, xiv.: "turpe comitatui virtutem
principis non adaequare." Beowulf had been deserted by his _comitatus_.

l. 2643. B. proposes user.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 216.

l. 2649. wutun; l. 3102, uton = pres. subj. pl. 1st person of witan, _to
go_, used like Mod. Eng. _let us_ + inf., Lat. _eamus_, Ital. _andiamo_,
Fr. _allons_; M. E. (_Layamon_) _uten_. Cf. Psa. ii. 3, etc. March, _A.-S.
Gram._, pp. 104, 196.

l. 2650. B. suggests hat for hyt,.--_Beit._ xii. 105.

l. 2656. fane = fah-ne; cf. fara = fah-ra, l. 578; so heanne (MS.) =
heah-ne, etc., l. 984. See Cook's Sievers' Gram.

ll. 2660, 2661. Why not read beadu-scrud, as at l. 453, = _battle-shirt?_
B. and R. suppose two half-verses omitted between byrdu-scrud and bam
gemaene. B. reads bywdu, = _handsome_, etc. Gr. suggests unc nu, = _to us
two now_, for urum; and K. and Grundt. read beon gemaene for bam, etc. This
makes sense. Cf. Ha., p. 89.

l. 2666. Cf. the dat. absolute without preposition.

l. 2681. Naegling; cf. Hrunting, Lafing, and other famous wundor-smietha
geweorc of the poem.

l. 2687. B. changes þonne into þone (rel. pro.) = _which_.--_Beit._ xii.
105.

l. 2688. B. supports the MS. reading, wundum.

l. 2688. Cf. l. 2278 for similar language.

l. 2698. B. (_Beit._ xii. 105) renders: "he did not heed the head of the
dragon (which Beowulf with his sword had struck without effect), but he
struck the dragon somewhat further down." Cf. Saxo, vi. p. 272.

l. 2698. Cf. the language used at ll. 446 and 1373, where hafelan also
occurs; and hydan.

l. 2700. hwene; cf. Lowl. Sc. _wheen_, a number; Chaucer's _woon_, number.

l. 2702. S. proposes þa (for þaet) þaet fyr, etc., = _when the fire began_,
etc.

l. 2704. "The (hup)-seax has often been found in Saxon graves on the hip of
the skeleton."--E.

l. 2707. Kl. proposes: feorh ealne wraec, = _drove out all the life_; cf.
_Gen._ l. 1385.--_Beit._ ix. 192. S. suggests gefylde,--_he felled the
foe_, etc.--_Ibid_. Parentheses seem unnecessary.

l. 2727. daeg-hwil = _time allotted, lifetime_.

l. 2745, 2745. Ho. removes geong from the beginning of l. 2745 and places
it at the end of l. 2744.

l. 2750. R. proposes sigle searogimmas, as at l. 1158.

l. 2767. (1) B. proposes doubtfully oferhigean or oferhigan, = Goth,
_ufarhauhjan_, p. p. _ufarhauhids_ (Gr. [Greek: tuphwtheis]) = _exceed in
value_.--_Tidskr_. viii. 60. (2) Kl. proposes oferhydian, = _to make
arrogant, infatuate_; cf. oferhyd.--_Beit._ ix. 192.

l. 2770. gelocen leoethocraeftum = (1) _spell-bound_ (Th., Arnold, E.); (2)
_wrought with hand-craft_ (G.); (3) _meshed, linked together_ (H., Ho.);
cf. _Elene_, ll. 1251, 522.

l. 2778. B. considers bill ... ealdhlafordes as Beowulf's short sword, with
which he killed the dragon, l. 2704 (_Tidskr_. viii. 299). R. proposes
ealdhlaforde. Muellenh. understands ealdhlaford to mean the former possessor
of the hoard. W. agrees to this, but conceives aergescod as a compd. = aere
calceatus, _sheathed in brass_. Ha. translates aergescod as vb. and adv.

l. 2791. Cf. l. 224, eoletes aet ende; landes aet ende, _Exod_. (Hunt).

l. 2792. MS. reads waeteres weorpan, which R. would change to waetere
sweorfan.

l. 2806. "Men saw from its height the whales tumbling in the waves, and
called it Whale's Ness (Hrones-naes)."--Br. p. 28. Cf. l. 3137.

l. 2815. Wiglaf was the next of kin, the last of the race, and hence the
recipient of Beowulf's kingly insignia. There is a possible play on the
word laf (Wig-_laf_, ende-_laf_).

l. 2818. gingeste word; cf. _novissima verba_, and Ger. _juengst_, lately.

l. 2837. E. translates on lande, _in the world_, comparing _on life, on
worulde_.

l. 2840. geraesde = pret. of geraesan (omitted from the Gloss.), same as
raesan; cf. l. 2691.

l. 2859. B. proposes deaeth araedan, = _determine death_.--_Beit._ xii. 106.

l. 2861. Change geongum to geongan as a scribal error (?), but cf.
Lichtenheld, _Haupts Zeitschr._ xvi. 353-355.

l. 2871. S. and W. propose ower.--_Beit._ ix. 142.

l. 2873. S. punctuates: wraethe forwurpe, þa, etc.

l. 2874. H.-So. begins a new sentence with nealles, ending the preceding
one with beget.

l. 2879. aetgifan = _to render, to afford_; omitted in Gloss.

ll. 2885-2892. "This passage ... equals the passage in Tacitus which
describes the tie of chief to companion and companion to chief among the
Germans, and which recounts the shame that fell on those who survived their
lord."--Br., p. 56.

l. 2886. cyn thus has the meaning of _gens_ or clan, just as in many
Oriental towns all are of one blood. E. compares Tacitus, _Germania_, 7;
and cf. "kith and kin."

l. 2892. Death is preferable to dishonor. Cf. Kemble, _Saxons_, i. 235.

l. 2901. The _[Greek: angelos]_ begins his _[Greek: angelia]_ here.

l. 2910. S. proposes higemeethe, _sad of soul;_ cf. ll. 2853 and 2864
(_Beit._ ix. 142). B. considers higemeethum a dat. or instr. pl. of an
abstract in -u (_Beit._ xii. 106). H. makes it a dat. pl. = _for the dead_.
For heafod-wearde, etc., cf. note on l. 446.

l. 2920-2921. B. explains "he could not this time, as usual, give jewels to
his followers."--_Beit._ xii. 106.

l. 2922. The Merovingian or Frankish race.

l. 2940 _seq._ B. conjectures:

    cwaeeth hie on mergenne      meces ecgum
    getan wolde,      sumon galgtreowu
    aheawan on holte      ond hie ahoan on þa
    fuglum to gamene.

--_Beit._ xii. 107, 372. Cf. S., _Beit._ ix. 143. getan = _cause blood to
be shed._

l. 2950. B. proposes gomela for goda; "a surprising epithet for a Geat to
apply to the 'terrible' Ongentheow."--Ha. p. 99. But "good" does not
necessarily mean "morally excellent," as a "good" hater, a "good" fighter.

l. 2959. See H.-So. for an explanatory quotation from Paulus Diaconus, etc.
B., K., and Th. read segn Higelaces, = H.'s banner uplifted began to pursue
the Swede-men.--_Beit._ xii. 108. S. suggests saece, = _pursuit_.

l. 2977. gewyrpton: this vb. is also used reflexively in _Exod_. (Hunt), l.
130: wyrpton hie werige.

l. 2989. baer is Grundt.'s reading, after the MS. "The surviving victor is
the heir of the slaughtered foe."--H.-So. Cf. _Hildebrands Lied_, ll. 61,
62.

l. 2995. "A hundred of thousands in land and rings" (Ha., p. 100). Cf. ll.
2196, 3051. Cf. B., _Beit._ xii. 20, who quotes Saxo's _bis senas gentes_
and remarks: "Hrolf Kraki, who rewards his follower, for the slaying of the
foreign king, with jewels, rich lands, and his only daughter's hand,
answers to the Jutish king Hygelac, who rewards his liegeman, for the
slaying of Ongentheow, with jewels, enormous estates, and _his_ only
daughter's hand."

l. 3006. H.-So. suggests Scilfingas for Scyldingas, because, at l. 2397,
Beowulf kills the Scylfing Eadgils and probably acquires his lands. Thus
ll. 3002, 3005, 3006, would indicate that, after Beowulf's death, the
Swedes desired to shake off his hated yoke. Muellenh., however, regards l.
3006 as a thoughtless repetition of l. 2053.--_Haupts Zeitschr._ xiv. 239.

l. 3008. Cf. the same proverb at l. 256; and _Exod._ (Hunt.) l. 293.

l. 3022. E. quotes:

    "Thai token an harp _gle and game_
    And maked a lai and yaf it name."
                --_Weber_, l. 358.

and from Percy, "The word _glee_, which peculiarly denoted their art (the
minstrels'), continues still in our own language ... it is to this day used
in a musical sense, and applied to a peculiar piece of composition."

l. 3025. "This is a finer use than usual of the common poetic attendants of
a battle, the wolf, the eagle, and the raven. The three are here like three
Valkyrie, talking of all that they have done."--Br., p. 57.

l. 3033. Cf. Hunt's _Dan._ l. 731, for similar language.

l. 3039. B. supplies a supposed gap here:

    [banan eac fundon      bennum seocne
    (ne) aer hi þaem      gesegan syllicran wiht]
    wyrm on wonge...
             --_Beit._ xii. 372.

Cf. Ha., p. 102. W. and Ho. insert [þaer] before gesegan.

l. 3042. Cf. l. 2561, where gryre-giest occurs as an epithet of the dragon.
B. proposes gry[re-fah].

l. 3044. lyft-wynne, _in the pride of the air_, E.; _to rejoice in the
air_, Ha.

l. 3057. (1) He (God) is men's hope; (2) he is the heroes' hope; (3) gehyld
= the secret place of enchanters; cf. helsmanna gehyld, Gr.'s reading,
after A.-S. haelsere, haruspex, augur.

l. 3060. B. suggests gehyethde, = _plundered_ (i.e. by the thief), for
gehydde.

ll. 3063-3066. (1) B. suggests wundur [deaethe] hwar þonne eorl ellenrof ende
gefere = _let a brave man then somewhere meet his end by wondrous venture_,
etc.--_Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 241; cf. l. 3038. (2) S. supposes an indirect
question introduced by hwar and dependent upon wundur, = _a mystery is it
when it happens that the hero is to die, if he is no longer to linger among
his people_.--_Beit._ ix. 143. (3) Muellenh. suggests: _is it to be wondered
at that a man should die when he can no longer live?_--_Zachers Zeitschr._
xiv. 241. (4) Possibly thus:

                         Wundraeth hwaet þonne,
    eorl ellen-rof,      ende gefere
    lif-gesceafta,      þonne leng ne maeg (etc.),

in which hwaet would = þurh hwaet at l. 3069, and eorl would be subject of
the conjectural vb. wundraeth: "the valiant earl wondereth then through what
he shall attain his life's end, when he no longer may live.... So Beowulf
knew not (wondered how) through what _his_ end should come," etc. W. and
Ho. join þonne to the next line. Or, for hwar read waere: Wundur waere þonne
(= gif), etc., = "would it be any wonder if a brave man," etc., which is
virtually Muellenhoff's.

l. 3053. galdre bewunden, _spell-bound_, throws light on l. 2770, gelocen
leoetho-craeftum. The "accursed" gold of legend is often dragon-guarded and
placed under a spell. Even human ashes (as Shakespeare's) are thus banned.
ll. 3047-3058 recall the so-called "Treasury of Atreus."

l. 3073. herh, hearh, _temple_, is conjectured by E. to survive in _Harrow.
Temple, barrow_, etc., have thus been raised to proper names. Cf. Biowulfes
biorh of l. 2808.

l. 3074. H.-So. has strude, = _ravage_, and compares l. 3127. MS. has
strade. S. suggests stride, = _tread_.

l. 3074. H.-So. omits stradan, = _tread, stride over_, from the Gloss.,
referring ll. 3174 and 3074 to strudan, q. v.

l. 3075. S. proposes: naes he goldhwaetes gearwor haefde, etc., = _Beowulf had
not before seen the greedy possessor's favor_.--_Beit._ ix. 143. B. reads,
goldhwaete gearwor haefde, etc., making goldhwaete modify est, = _golden
favor_; but see _Beit._ xii. 373, for B.'s later view.

l. 3086-3087. B. translates, "that which (i.e. the treasure) drew the king
thither was granted indeed, but it overwhelmed us."--_Beit._ xii. 109.

l. 3097. B. and S. propose aefter wine deadum, = _in memory of the dead
friend_.--_Beit._ ix. 144.

l. 3106. The brad gold here possibly includes the iu-monna gold of l. 3053
and the wunden gold of l. 3135. E. translates brad by _bullion_.

l. 3114. B. supposes folc-agende to be dat. sg. to godum, referring to
Beowulf.

l. 3116. C. considers weaxan, = Lat. _vescor_, to devour, as a parallel to
fretan, and discards parentheses.--_Beit._ viii. 573.

l. 3120. fus = _furnished with_; a meaning which must be added to those in
the Gloss.

ll. 3124-3125. S. proposes:

    eode eahta sum      under inwit-hrof
    hilderinca:      sum on handa baer, etc.
                            --_Beit._ ix. 144.

l. 3136. H.-So. corrects (after B.) to aeetheling_c_, the MS. having _e_.

l. 3145. "It was their [the Icelanders'] belief that the higher the smoke
rose in the air the more glorious would the burnt man be in heaven."--
_Ynglinga Saga_, 10 (quoted by E.). Cf. the funeral pyre of Herakles.

l. 3146-3147. B. conjectures:

                   ... swogende lec
    wope bewunden      windblonda leg

(lec from lacan, see Gloss.).--_Beit._ xii. 110. Why not windblonda lac?

l. 3147. Muellenhoff rejected wind-blond gelaeg because a great fire raises
rather than "lays" the wind; hence B., as above, = "swoughing sported the
flame wound with the howling of wind-currents."

l. 3151 _seq._ B. restores conjecturally:

    swylce giomor-gyd      sio geo-meowle
    [aefter Beowulfe]      bunden-heorde
    [song] sorg-cearig,      saede geneahhe,
    þaet hio hyre [hearm-]dagas      hearde on [dr]ede,
    waelfylla worn,      [w]igendes egesan,
    hy[n]etho ond haeftnyd,      heof on rice wealg.
                   --_Beit._ xii. 100.

Here geo-meowle = _old woman_ or _widow;_ bunden-heorde = _with bound
locks;_ heof = _lamentation;_ cf. l. 3143. on rice wealg is less preferable
than the MS. reading, heofon rece swealg = _heaven swallowed the smoke_.--
H.-So. B. thinks Beowulf's widow (geomeowle) was probably Hygd; cf. ll.
2370, 3017-3021.

l. 3162. H.-So. reads (with MS.) bronda be lafe, for betost, and omits
colon after becn. So B., _Zachers Zeitschr._ iv. 224.

l. 3171. E. quotes Gibbon's accounts of the burial of Attila when the
"chosen squadrons of the Hun, wheeling round in measured evolutions,
chanted a funeral song to the memory of a hero."

ll. 3173-3174. B. proposes:

    woldon gen cwiethan      [ond] kyning
    wordgyd wrecan      ond ymb wel sprecan.
                   --_Beit._ xii. 112.

l. 3183. Z., K., Th. read manna for mannum.

l. 3184. "It is the English ideal of a hero as it was conceived by an
Englishman some twelve hundred years ago."--Br., p. 18.



NOTES TO THE FIGHT AT FINNSBURG.

The original MS. of this fragment has vanished, but a copy had been made
and printed by Hickes in his _Thesaurus Linguarum Septentrionalium_, i.
192. The original was written on a single sheet attached to a codex of
homilies in the Lambeth Library. Moeller, _Alteng. Epos_, p. 65, places the
fragment in the Finn episode, between ll. 1146 and 1147. Bugge (_Beit._
xii. 20) makes it illustrate the conflict in which Hnaef fell, _i.e._ as
described in _Beowulf_ as antecedent to the events there given. Heinzel
(_Anzeiger f. d. Altert_.), however, calls attention to the fact that
Hengest in the fragment is called cyning, whereas in _Beowulf_, l. 1086, he
is called þegn. See H.-So., p. 125.

"The _Fight at Finnsburg_ and the lays from which our _Beowulf_ was
composed were, as it seems to me, sung among the English who dwelt in the
north of Denmark and the south of Sweden, and whose tribal name was the
Jutes or Goths."--Br., p. 101.

l. 1. R. supposes [hor]nas, and conjectures such an introductory
conversation as follows: "Is it dawning in the east, or is a fiery dragon
flying about, or are the turrets of some castle burning?" questions which
the king negatives in the same order. Then comes the positive declaration,
"rather they are warriors marching whose armor gleams in the moonlight."
--_Alt- und Angels. Lesebuch_, 1861. Heinzel and B. conjecture, [beorhtor
hor]nas byrnaeth naefre. So. G.--_Beit._ xii. 22; _Anzeiger f. d. Altert._ x.
229.

l. 5. B. conjectures fugelas to mean _arrows_, and supplies:

    ac her foreth beraeth      [fyrdsearu rincas,
    flacre flanbogan],      fugelas singaeth.

He compares Saxo, p. 95, _cristatis galeis hastisque sonantibus instant_,
as explanatory of l. 6.--_Beit._ xii. 22. But see Brooke, _Early Eng.
Literature_, who supposes fugelas = _raven_ and _eagle_, while graeg-hama is
= _wulf_ (the "grey-coated one"), the ordinary accompaniers of battle.

l. 11. hicgeaeth, etc.: cf. _Maldon_, l. 5; _Exod_. l. 218.

l. 15. Cf. B. (_Beit._ xii. 25), etc., and Saxo, p. 101, for l. 13.

ll. 18-21. H.-So. remarks: "If, according to Moeller and Bugge, Garulf is
one of the attackers, one of Finn's men, this does not harmonize with his
character as Guethlaf's son (l. 33), who (l. 16, and _Beowulf_, l. 1149) is a
Dane, therefore one of Finn's antagonists." B. (_Beit._ xii. 25)
conjectures:

    þa gyt Guethdene      Garulf styrode,
    þaet he swa freolic feorh      forman siethe
    to þaere healle durum      hyrsta ne baere,
    nu hie nietha heard      anyman wolde;

in which Guethdene is the same as Sigefereth, l. 24; he (l. 22) refers to
Garulf; and hie (l. 21) to hyrsta.

l. 27. swaeether = _either_ (bad or good, life or death).--H.-So.

l. 29. celod: meaning doubtful; cf. _Maldon_, l. 283. G. renders "curved
board"; Sw. suggests "round"? "hollow"?

l. 30. B. suggests bar-helm, = _boar-helm._ Cf. Saxo, p. 96.--_Beit._ xii.
26.

l. 34. B. conjectures: (1) hwearf flacra hraew hraefen, wandrode; (2) hwearf
flacra hraew hraefen fram oethrum = _flew from one corpse to another_.--_Beit._
xii. 27.

l. 43. B. supposes wund haeleeth to be a Dane, folces hyrde to be Hnaef, in
opposition to Holtzmann (_Germania_, viii. 494), who supposes the wounded
man to be a Frisian, and folces hyrde to be their king, Finn.--_Beit._ xii.
28.

l. 45. B. adopts Th.'s reading heresceorp unhror = _equipments
useless_.--_Beit._ xii. 28.

l. 47. "Though wounded, they had retained their strength and activity in
battle."--B., _Beit._ xii. 28.



ADDENDA.

ll. 105 and 218. MS. and Ho. read won-saeli and fami-heals.

ll. 143, 183, 186, etc. Read þaem for þaem.

l. 299. MS. reads god-fremmendra. So H.-So.

l. 338. Ho. marks wraec- and its group long.

l. 530. Hwaet should here probably be printed as an interj., hwaet! Cf. ll.
1, 943, 2249.

l. 2263. Koeppel suggests nis for naes.

The editors are much indebted to E. Koeppel (in _Eng. Stud._ xiii. 3) for
numerous corrections in text and glossary.

l. 3070. H.-So. begins a new line with swa.




GLOSSARY

A

ac, conj. denoting contrariety: hence 1) _but_ (like N.H.G. sondern), 109,
135, 339, etc.--2) _but_ (N.H.G. aber), _nevertheless_, 602, 697, etc.--3)
in direct questions: nonne, numquid, 1991.

aglaeca, ahlaeca, aeglaeca, -cea, w. m. (cf. Goth, aglo, _trouble_, O.N. agi,
_terror_, + lac, _gift, sport: = misery, vexation, = bringer of trouble_;
hence): 1) _evil spirit, demon, a demon-like being_; of Grendel, 159, 433,
593, etc.; of the drake, 2535, 2906, etc.--2) _great hero, mighty warrior_;
of Sigemund, 894; of Beowulf: gen. sg. aglaecan(?), 1513; of Beowulf and the
drake: nom. pl. þa aglaecean, 2593.

aglaec-wif, st. n., _demon, devil, in the form of a woman_; of Grendel's
mother, 1260.

aldor. See ealdor.

al-wealda. See eal-w.

am-biht (from and-b., Goth, and-baht-s), st. m., _servant, man-servant_:
nom. sg. ombeht, of the coast-guard, 287; ombiht, of Wulfgar, 336.

ambiht-þegn (from ambiht n. officium and þegn, which see), _servant,
man-servant_: dat. sg. ombiht-þegne, of Beowulf's servant, 674.

an, prep, with the dat., _on, in, with respect to_, 678; _with, among, at,
upon_ (position after the governed word), 1936; with the acc., 1248.
Elsewhere on, which see.

ancor, st. m., _anchor_: dat. sg. ancre, 303, 1884.

ancor-bend, m. (?) f. (?), _anchor-cable_: dat. pl. oncer-bendum, 1919.

and, conj. (ond is usual form; for example, 601, 1149, 2041), and 33, 39,
40, etc. (See Appendix.)

anda, w. m., _excitement, vexation, horror_: dat. wraethum on andan, 709,
2315.

and-git, st. n., _insight, understanding_: nom. sg., 1060. See gitan.

and-hator, st. m. n., _heat coming against one_: gen. sg. reethes
and-hattres, 2524.

and-lang, -long, adj., _very long._ hence 1) _at whole length, raised up
high_: acc. andlongne eorl, 2696 (cf. Bugge upon this point, Zachers
Ztschr., 4, 217).--2) _continual, entire_; andlangne daeg, 2116, _the whole
day_; andlonge niht, 2939.

and-lean, st. n., _reward, payment in full_: acc. sg., 1542, 2095 (hand-,
hond-lean, MS.).

and-risno, st. f. (see risan, surgere, decere), _that which is to be
observed, that which is proper, etiquette_: dat. pl. for andrysnum,
_according to etiquette_, 1797.

and-saca, w. m., _adversary_: godes andsaca (Grendel), 787, 1683.

and-slyht, st. m., _blow in return_: acc. sg., 2930, 2973 (MS. both times
hond-slyht).

and-swaru, st. f., _act of accosting_: 1) to persons coming up, _an
address_, 2861.--2) in reply to something said, _an answer_, 354, 1494,
1841.

and-weard, adj., _present, existing_: acc. sg. n. swin ofer helme and-weard
(_the image of the boar, which stands on his helm_), 1288.

and-wlita, w. m., _countenance_: acc. sg. -an, 690.

an-sund, adj., _entirely unharmed_: nom. sg. m., 1001.

an-syn, f., _the state of being seen_: hence 1) _the exterior, the form_,
251: ansyn ywde, _showed his form_, i.e. appeared, 2835.--2) _aspect,
appearance_, 929; on-syn, 2773.

an-walda, w. m., _He who rules over all, God_, 1273. See Note.

atol, adj. (also eatol, 2075, etc.), _hostile, frightful, cruel_: of
Grendel, 159, 165, 593, 2075, etc.; of Grendel's mother's hands (dat. pl.
atolan), 1503; of the undulation of the waves, 849; of battle, 597,
2479.--cf. O.N. atall, fortis, strenuus.

atelic, adj., _terrible, dreadful_: atelic egesa, 785.


A

a, adv. (Goth, aiv, acc. from aiv-s aevum), _ever, always_, 455, 882, 931,
1479: a syethethan, _ever afterwards, ever, ever after_, 283, 2921.--_ever_,
780.--Comp. na.

ad st. m. _funeral pile_: acc. sg. ad, 3139; dat. sg. ade, 1111, 1115.

ad-faru, st. f., _way to the funeral pile_, dat. sg. on ad-faere, 3011.

adl, st. f. _sickness_, 1737, 1764, 1849.

aeth, st. m., _oath in general_, 2740; _oath of allegiance_, 472 (?); _oath
of reconciliation of two warring peoples_, 1098, 1108.

aeth-sweord, st. n., _the solemn taking of an oath, the swearing of an oath_:
nom. pl., 2065. See sweord.

aethum-swerian, m. pl., _son-in-law and father-in-law_: dat. pl., 84.

agan, verb, pret. and pres., _to have, to possess_, w. acc.: III. prs. sg.
ah, 1728; inf. agan, 1089; prt. ahte, 487, 522, 533; with object, geweald,
to be supplied, 31. Form contracted with the negative: prs. sg. I. nah hwa
sweord wege (_I have no one to wield the sword_), 2253.

agen, adj., _own, peculiar_, 2677.

agend (prs. part. of agan), _possessor, owner, lord_: gen. sg. agendes, _of
God_, 3076.--Compounds: blaed-, bold-, folc-, maegen-agend.

agend-frea, w. m., _owner, lord_: gen. sg. agend-frean, 1884.

ahsian, ge-ahsian, w. v.: 1) _to examine, to find out by inquiring_: pret.
part. ge-ahsod, 433.--2) _to experience, to endure_: pret. ahsode, 1207;
pl. ahsodon, 423.

aht, st. n. (contracted from a-wiht, which see), _something, anything_: aht
cwices, 2315.

an, num. The meaning of this word betrays its apparent demonstrative
character: 1) _this, that_, 2411, of the hall in the earth mentioned
before; similarly, 100 (of Grendel; already mentioned), cf. also 2775.--2)
_one_, a particular one among many, a single one, in numerical sense: ymb
ane niht (_the next night_), 135; þurh anes craeft, 700; þara anum, 1038; an
aefter anum, _one for the other_ (Hreethel for Herebeald), 2462: similarly, an
aefter eallum, 2269; anes hwaet, _some single thing, a part_, 3011; se an
leoda duguethe, _the one of the heroes of the people_, 2238; anes willan,
_for the sake of a single one_, 3078, etc.--Hence, again, 3) _alone,
distinguished_, 1459, 1886.--4) _a_, in the sense of an indefinite article:
an ... feond, 100; gen. sg. anre bene (or to No.2[?]), 428; an ... draca,
221l--5) gen. pl. anra, in connection with a pronoun, _single_; anra
gehwylces, _every single one_, 733; anra gehwylcum, 785. Similarly, the
dat. pl. in this sense: nemne feaum anum, _except a few single ones_,
1082.--6) solus, _alone_: in the strong form, 1378, 2965; in the weak form,
145, 425, 431, 889, etc.; with the gen., ana Geata duguethe, _alone of the
warriors of the Geatas_, 2658.--7) solitarius, _alone, lonely_, see
aen.--Comp. nan.

an-feald, adj., _simple, plain, without reserve_: acc. sg. anfealdne
geþoht, _simple opinion_, 256.

an-genga, -gengea, w. m., _he who goes alone_, of Grendel, 165, 449.

an-haga, w. m., _he who stands alone_, solitarius, 2369.

an-hydig, adj. (like the O.N. ein-rad-r, _of one resolve_, i.e. of firm
resolve), _of one opinion_, i.e. firm, brave, decided, 2668.

anga, adj. (only in the weak form), _single, only_: acc. sg. angan dohtor,
375, 2998; angan eaferan, 1548; dat. sg. angan breether, 1263.

an-paeeth, st. m., _lonely way, path_: acc. pl. anpaethas, 1411.

an-raed, adj. (cf. under an-hydig), _of firm resolution, resolved_, 1530,
1576.

an-tid, st. f., _one time_, i.e. the same time, ymb an-tid oethres dogores,
_about the same time the second day_ (they sailed twenty-four hours),
219.--an stands as in an-mod, O.H.G. ein-muoti, _harmonious, of the same
disposition_.

anunga, adv., _throughout, entirely, wholly_, 635.

ar, st. m., _ambassador, messenger_, 336, 2784.

ar, st. f., 1) _honor, dignity_: arum healdan, _to hold in honor_, 296;
similarly, 1100, 1183.--2) _favor, grace, support_: acc. sg. are, 1273,
2607; dat. sg. are, 2379; gen. pl. hwaet ... arna, 1188.--Comp. worold-ar;
also written aer.

ar-faest, adj., _honorable, upright_, 1169; of Hunfereth (with reference to
588). See faest.

arian, w. v., (_to be gracious_), _to spare_: III. sg. prs. w. dat. naenegum
araeth; of Grendel, 599.

ar-staef, st. m.,(elementum honoris), _grace, favor_: dat. pl. mid arstafum,
317.--_Help, support_: dat. pl. for ar-stafum, _to the assistance_, 382,
458. See staef.

ater-tear, m., _poisonous drop_: dat. pl. iren ater-tearum fah (steel which
is dipped in poison or in poisonous sap of plants), 1460.

attor, st. n., _poison_, here of the poison of the dragon's bite: nom.,
2716.

attor-sceaetha, w. m., _poisonous enemy, of the poisonous dragon_: gen. sg.
-sceaethan, 2840.

awa, adv. (certainly not the dative, but a reduplicated form of a, which
see), _ever_: awa to aldre, _for ever and ever_, 956.


Ae

aedre, adv., _hastily, directly, immediately_, 77, 354, 3107. [aedre.]

aeethele, adj., _noble_: nom. sg., of Beowulf, 198, 1313; of Beowulf's father,
263, where it can be understood as well in a moral as in a genealogical
sense; the latter prevails decidedly in the gen. sg. aeethelan cynnes, 2235.

aeetheling, st. m., _nobleman, man of noble descent_, especially the
appellation of a man of royal birth; so of the kings of the Danes, 3; of
Scyld, 33; of Hroethgar, 130; of Sigemund, 889; of Beowulf, 1226, 1245, 1597,
1816, 2189, 2343, 2375, 2425, 2716, 3136; perhaps also of Daeghrefn,
2507;--then, in a broader sense, also denoting other noble-born men:
Aeschere, 1295; Hroethgar's courtiers, 118, 983; Heremod's courtiers, 907;
Hengest's warriors, 1113; Beowulf's retinue, 1805, 1921, 3172; noble-born
in general, 2889. --Comp. sib-aeetheling.

aeethelu, st. n., only in the pl., _noble descent, nobility_, in the sense of
noble lineage: acc. pl. aeethelu, 392; dat. pl. cyning aeethelum god, _the king,
of noble birth_, 1871; aeethelum diore, _worthy on account of noble lineage_,
1950; aeethelum (haeleþum, MS.), 332.--Comp. faeder-aeethelu.

aefnan, w. v. w. acc., _to perform, to carry out, to accomplish_: inf.
ellen-weorc aefnan, _to do a heroic deed_, 1465; pret. unriht aefnde,
_perpetrated wrong_, 1255.

ge-aefnan, 1) _to carry out, to do, to accomplish_: pret. pl. þaet geaefndon
swa, _so carried that out_, 538; pret. part. aeth waes geaefned, _the oath was
sworn_, 1108.--2) _get ready, prepare_: pret. part. geaefned, 3107. See
efnan.

aefter (comparative of af, Ags. of, which see; hence it expresses the idea
of _forth, away, from, back_), a) adv., _thereupon, afterwards_, 12, 341,
1390, 2155.--ic him aefter sceal, _I shall go after them_, 2817; in word
aefter cwaeeth, 315, the sense seems to be, _spoke back, having turned_; b)
prep. w. dat., 1) (temporal) _after_, 119, 128, 187, 825, 1939, etc.; aefter
beorne, _after the_ (death of) _the hero_, 2261, so 2262; aefter
maethethum-welan, _after_ (obtaining) _the treasure_, 2751.--2) (causal) as
proceeding from something, denoting result and purpose, hence, _in
consequence of, conformably to_: aefter rihte, _in accordance with right_,
1050, 2111; aefter faroethe, _with the current_, 580; so 1321, 1721, 1944,
2180, etc., aefter heaetho-swate, _in consequence of the blood of battle_,
1607; aefter waelniethe, _in consequence of mortal enmity_, 85; _in accordance
with, on account of, after, about_: aefter aeethelum (haeleþum, MS.)fraegn,
_asked about the descent_, 332; ne frin þu aefter saelum, _ask not after my
welfare_, 1323; aefter sincgyfan greoteeth, _weeps for the giver of treasure_,
1343; him aefter deorum men dyrne langaeth, _longs in secret for the dear
man_, 1880; an aefter anum, _one for the other_, 2462, etc.--3) (local),
_along_: aefter gumcynnum, _throughout the races of men, among men_, 945;
sohte bed aefter burum, _sought a bed among the rooms of the castle_ (the
castle was fortified, the hall was not), 140; aefter recede wlat, _looked
along the hall_, 1573; stone aefter stane, _smelt along the rocks_, 2289;
aefter lyfte, _along the air through the air_, 2833; similarly, 996, 1068,
1317, etc.

aef-þunca, w. m., _anger, chagrin, vexatious affair_: nom., 502.

aeglaecea. See aglaecea.

aeled (Old Sax. eld, O.N. edl-r), st. m., _fire_, 3016. [aeled.]

aeled-leoma, w. m., _(fire-light), torch_: acc. sg. leoman, 3126. See leoma.

ael-fylce (from ael-, Goth. ali-s, [Greek: allos], and fylce, O.N. fylki,
collective form from folc), st. n., _other folk, hostile army_: dat. pl.
wieth aelfylcum, 2372.

ael-mihtig (for eal-m.), adj., _almighty_: nom. sg. m., of the weak form, se
ael-mihtiga, 92.

ael-wiht, st. m., _being of another species, monster_: gen. pl. ael-wihta
eard, of the dwelling-place of Grendel's kindred, 1501.

aeppel-fealu, adj., _dappled sorrel_, or _apple-yellow_: nom. pl.
aeppel-fealuwe mearas, _apple-yellow steeds_, 2166.

aern, st. n., _house_, in the compounds heal-, hord-, medo-, þryeth-, win-aern.

aesc, st. m., _ash_ (does not occur in Beowulf in this sense), _lance,
spear_, because the shaft consists of ash wood: dat. pl. (qua instr.) aescum
and ecgum, _with spears and swords_, 1773.

aesc-holt, st. n., _ash wood, ashen shaft_: nom. pl. aesc-holt ufan graeg,
_the ashen shafts gray above_ (spears with iron points), 330.

aesc-wiga, w. m., _spear-fighter, warrior armed with the spear_: nom. sg.,
2043.

aet, prep. w. dat., with the fundamental meaning of nearness to something,
hence 1) local, a) _with, near, at, on, in_ (rest): aet hyethe, in _harbor_,
32; aet symle, _at the meal_, 81, aet ade, _on the funeral-pile_, 1111, 1115;
aet þe anum, _with thee alone_, 1378; aet wige, _in the fight_, 1338; aet
hilde, 1660, 2682; aet aete, _in eating_, 3027, etc. b) _to, towards, at, on_
(motion to): deaethes wylm hran aet heortan, _seized upon the heart_, 2271;
geheton aet haergtrafum, _vowed at_ (or _to_) _the temples of the gods_, 175.
c) with verbs of taking away, _away from_ (as starting from near an
object): geþeah þaet ful aet Wealhþeon, _took the cup from W_., 630; fela ic
gebad grynna aet Grendle, _from Grendel_, 931; aet minum faeder genam, _took
me from my father to himself_, 2430.--2) temporal, _at, in, at the time
of_: aet frumsceafte, _in the beginning_, 45; aet ende, _at an end_, 224;
fand sinne dryhten ealdres aet ende, _at the end of life, dying_, 2791;
similarly, 2823; aet feohgyftum, _in giving gifts_, 1090; aet siethestan,
_finally_, 3014.

aet-graepe, adj., _laying hold of_, prehendens, 1270.

aet-rihte, adv., _almost_, 1658.


AE

aedre, edre, st. f., _aqueduct, canal_ (not in Beow.), _vein_ (not in
Beow.), _stream, violent pouring forth_: dat. pl. swat aedrum sprong, _the
blood sprang in streams_, 2967; blod edrum dranc, _drank the blood in
streams_(?), 743.

aeethm, st. m., _breath, gasp, snort_: instr. sg. hreether aeethme weoll, _the
breast_ (of the drake) _heaved with snorting_, 2594.

aefen, st. m., _evening_, 1236.

aefen-gram, adj., _hostile at evening, night-enemy_: nom. sg. m. aefen-grom,
of Grendel, 2075.

aefen-leoht, st. n., _evening-light_: nom. sg., 413.

aefen-raest, st. f., _evening-rest_: acc. sg. -raeste, 647, 1253.

aefen-spraec, st. f., _evening-talk_: acc. sg. gemunde ...aefen-spraece,
_thought about what he had spoken in the evening_, 760.

aefre, adv., _ever, at any time_, 70, 280, 504, 693, etc.: in negative
sentences, aefre ne, _never_, 2601.--Comp. naefre.

aeg-hwa (O.H.G. eo-ga-hwer), pron., _every, each_: dat. sg. aeghwaem, 1385.
The gen. sg. in adverbial sense, _in all, throughout, thoroughly_: aeghwaes
untaele, _thoroughly blameless_, 1866; aeghwaes unrim, _entirely innumerable
quantity_, i.e. an enormous multitude, 2625, 3136.

aeg-hwaeether (O.H.G. eo-ga-hwedar): 1) _each_ (of two): nom. sg. haefde
aeghwaeether ende gefered, _each of the two_ (Beowulf and the drake) _had
reached the end_, 2845; dat. sg. aeghwaeethrum waes broga fram oethrum, _to each
of the two_ (Beowulf and the drake) _was fear of the other_, 2565; gen. sg.
aeghwaeethres ... worda and worca, 287.--2) _each_ (of several): dat. sg. heora
aeghwaeethrum, 1637.

aeg-hwaer, adv., _everywhere_, 1060.

aeg-hwilc (O.H.G. eo-gi-hwelih), pron., unusquisque, _every_ (one): 1) used
as an adj.: acc. sg. m. dael aeghwylcne, 622.--2) as substantive, a) with the
partitive genitive: nom. sg. aeg-hwylc, 9, 2888; dat. sg. aeghwylcum, 1051.
b) without gen.: nom. sg. aeghwylc, 985, 988; (waes) aeghwylc oethrum trywe,
_each one_ (of two) _true to the other_, 1166.

aeg-weard, st. f., _watch on the sea shore_: acc. sg. aeg-wearde, 241.

aeht (abstract form from agan, denoting the state of possessing), st. f.: 1)
_possession, power_: acc. sg. on flodes aeht, 42; on waeteres aeht, _into the
power of the water_, 516; on aeht gehwearf Denigea frean, _passed over into
the possession of a Danish master_, 1680.--2) _property, possessions,
goods_: acc. pl. aehte, 2249.--Comp. maethm-, gold-aeht.

aeht (O.H.G. ahta), st. f., _pursuit_: nom. þa waes aeht boden Sweona leodum,
segn Higelace, _then was pursuit offered to the people of the Sweonas,
(their) banner to Hygelac_ (i.e. the banner of the Swedes, taken during
their flight, fell into the hands of Hygelac), 2958.

ge-aehtan, w. v., _to prize, to speak in praise of_: pret. part. geaehted,
1866. [geaehtan.]

ge-aehtla, w. m., or ge-aehtle, w. f., _a speaking of with praise, high
esteem_: gen. sg. hy ... wyrethe þinceaeth eorla geaehtlan, _seem worthy of the
high esteem of the noble-born_, 369. [geaehtla.]

aen (oblique form of an), num., _one_: acc. sg. m. þone aenne þone..., _the
one whom_..., 1054; oftor micle þonne on aenne sieth, _much oftener than one
time_, 1580; foreth onsendon aenne, _sent him forth alone_, 46.

aene, adv., _once_: oft nalles aene, 3020.

aenig, pron., _one, any one_, 474, 503, 510, 534, etc.: instr. sg. nolde ...
0nige þinga, _would in no way, not at all_, 792; lyt aenig mearn, _little
did any one sorrow_ (i.e. no one), 3130.--With the article: naes se
folccyning ... aenig, _no people's king_, 2735.--Comp. naenig.

aen-lic, adj., _alone, excellent, distinguished_: aenlic ansyn,
_distinguished appearance_, 251; þeah þe hio aenlicu sy, _though she be
beautiful_, 1942.

aer (comparative form, from a): 1) adv., _sooner, before, beforehand_, 15,
656, 695, 758, etc., _for a long time_, 2596; eft swa aer, _again as
formerly_, 643; aer ne siethethan, _neither sooner nor later_, 719; aer and sieth,
_sooner and later_ (all times), 2501; no þy aer (_not so much the sooner_),
_yet not_, 755, 1503, 2082, 2161, 2467.--2) conjunct., _before, ere_: a)
with the ind.: aer hio to setle geong, 2020. b) w. subjunc.: aer ge fyr
feran, _before you travel farther_, 252; aer he on hwurfe 164, so 677, 2819;
aer þon daeg cwome, _ere the day break_, 732; aer correlative to aer adv.: aer
he feorh seleeth, aldor an ofre, aer he wille ..., _he will sooner_ (rather)
_leave his life upon the shore, before_ (than) _he will_ ..., 1372.--3)
prepos. with dat., _before_ aer deaethe, _before death_, 1389; aer daeges hwile,
_before daybreak_, 2321; aer swylt-daege, _before the day of death_, 2799.

aeror, comp. adv., _sooner, before-hand_, 810; _formerly_, 2655.

aerra, comp. adj., _earlier_; instr. pl., aerran maelum, _in former times_,
908, 2238, 3036.

aerest, superl.: 1) adv., _first of all, foremost_, 6, 617, 1698, etc.--2)
as subst. n., _relation to, the beginning_: acc. þaet ic his aerest þe eft
gesaegde (_to tell thee in what relation it stood at first to the coat of
mail that has been presented_), 2158. See Note.

aer-daeg, st. m. (_before-day_), _morning-twilight, gray of morning_: dat.
sg. mid aerdaege, 126; samod aerdaege, 1312, 2943.

aerende, st. n., _errand, trust_: acc. sg., 270, 345.

aer-faeder, st. m., _late father, deceased father_: nom sg. swa his aerfaeder,
2623.

aer-gestreon, st. n., _old treasure, possessions dating from old times_: acc
sg., 1758; gen. sg. swylcra fela aergestreona, _much of such old treasure_,
2233. See gestreon.

aer-geweorc, st. n., _work dating from old times_: nom. sg. enta aer-geweorc,
_the old work of the giants_ (of the golden sword-hilt from Grendel's
water-hall), 1680. See geweorc.

aer-god, adj., _good since old times, long invested with dignity_ or
_advantages_: aeetheling aergod, 130; (eorl) aergod, 1330; iren aergod
(_excellent sword_), 990, 2587.

aer-wela, w. m., _old possessions, riches dating from old times_: acc. sg.
aerwelan, 2748. See wela.

aes, st. n., _carcass, carrion_: dat. (instr.) sg. aese, of Aeschere's corpse,
1333.

aet, st. m., _food, meat_: dat, sg., hu him aet aete speow, _how he fared well
at meat_, 3027.

aettren (see attor), adj., _poisonous_: waes þaet blod to þaes hat, aettren
ellorgast, se aer inne swealt, _so hot was the blood, (and) poisonous the
demon_ (Grendel's mother) _who died therein_, 1618


B

bana, bona, w. m., _murderer_, 158, 588, 1103, etc.: acc. sg. bonan
Ongenþeowes, of Hygelac, although in reality his men slew Ongenþeow (2965
ff.), 1969. Figuratively of inanimate objects: ne waes ecg bona, 2507; weareth
wracu Weohstanes bana, 2614.--Comp.: ecg-, feorh-, gast-, hand-, mueth-bana.

bon-gar, st. m. _murdering spear_, 2032.

ge-bannan, st. v. w. acc. of the thing and dat. of the person, _to command,
to bid_: inf., 74.

bad, st. f., _pledge_, only in comp.: nyd-bad.

ban, st. n., _bone_: dat. sg. on bane (on the bony skin of the drake),
2579; dat. pl. heals ealne ymbefeng biteran banum (here of the teeth of the
drake), 2693.

ban-cofa, w. m., "cubile ossium" (Grimm) of the body: dat. sg. -cofan,
1446.

ban-fag, adj., _variegated with bones_, either with ornaments made of
bone-work, or adorned with bone, perhaps deer-antlers; of Hroethgar's hall,
781. The last meaning seems the more probable.

ban-faet, st. n., _bone-vessel_, i.e. the body: acc. pl. ban-fatu, 1117.

ban-hring, st. m., _the bone-structure, joint, bone-joint_: acc. pl. hire
wieth halse ... banhringas braec (_broke her neck-joint_), 1568.

ban-hus, st. n., _bone-house_, i.e. the body: acc. sg. banhus gebraec, 2509;
similarly, 3148.

ban-loca, w. m., _the enclosure of the bones_, i.e. the body: acc. sg. bat
banlocan, _bit the body_, 743; nom. pl. burston banlocan, _the body burst_
(of Grendel, because his arm was torn out), 819.

bat, st. m., _boat, craft, ship_, 211.--Comp. sae-bat.

bat-weard, st. m., _boat-watcher, he who keeps watch over the craft._ dat.
sg. -wearde, 1901.

baeeth, st. n., _bath_: acc. sg. ofer ganotes baeeth, _over the diver's bath_
(i.e. the sea), 1862.

baernan, w. v., _to cause to burn, to burn_: inf. het ... banfatu baernan,
_bade that the bodies be burned_, 1117; ongan ... beorht hofu baernan,
_began to consume the splendid country-seats_ (the dragon), 2314.

for-baernan, w. v., _consume with fire_: inf. hy hine ne moston ...
brondefor-baernan, _they_ (the Danes) _could not burn him_ (the dead
Aeschere) _upon the funeral-pile_, 2127.

baedan (Goth, baidjan, O.N. beethia), _to incite, to encourage_: pret. baedde
byre geonge, _encouraged the youths_ (at the banquet), 2019.

ge-baedan, w. v., _to press hard_: pret. part. bysigum gebaeded, _distressed
by trouble, difficulty, danger_ (of battle), 2581; _to drive, to send
forth_: straela storm strengum gebaeded, _the storm of arrows sent with
strength_, 3118; _overcome_: draca ... bealwe gebaeded, _the dragon ...
overcome by the ills of battle_, 2827.

bael (O.N. bal), st. n., _fire, flames_: (wyrm) mid baele for, _passed
(through the air) with fire_, 2309; haefde landwara lige befangan, baele and
bronde, _with fire and burning_, 2323.--Especially, _the fire of the
funeral-pile, the funeral-pile_, 1110, 1117, 2127; aer he bael cure, _ere he
sought the burning_ (i.e. died), 2819; hataeth ... hlaew gewyrcean ... aefter
baele, _after I am burned, let a burial mound be thrown up_ (Beowulf's
words), 2804.

bael-fyr, st. n., _bale-fire, fire of the funeral-pile_: gen. pl. baelfyra
maest, 3144.

bael-stede, st. m., _place for the funeral-pile_: dat. sg. in bael=stede,
3098.

bael-wudu, st. m., _wood for the funeral-pile_, 3113.

baer, st. f., _bier_, 3106.

ge-baeran, w. v., _to conduct one's self, behave_: inf. w. adv., ne gefraegen
ic þa maegethe ... sel gebaeran, _I did not hear that a troop bore itself
better, maintained a nobler deportment_, 1013; he on eorethan geseah þone
leofestan lifes aet ende bleate gebaeran, _saw the best-beloved upon the
earth, at the end of his life, struggling miserably_ (i.e. in a helpless
situation), 2825.

ge-baetan (denominative from baete, _the bit_), w. v., _to place the bit in
the mouth of an animal, to bridle_: pret. part. þa waes Hroethgare hors
gebaeted, 1400.

be, prep. w. dat. (with the fundamental meaning _near_, "but not of one
direction, as aet, but more general"): 1) local, _near by, near, at, on_
(rest): be ydlafe uppe laegon, _lay above, upon the deposit of the waves_
(upon the strand, of the slain nixies), 566; haefde be honda, _held by the
hand_ (Beowulf held Grendel), 815; be saem tweonum, _in the circuit of both
the seas_, 859, 1686; be maeste, _on the mast_, 1906; by fyre, _by the
fire_, 2220; be naesse, _at the promontory_, 2244; saet be þaem gebroethrum
twaem, _sat by the two brothers_, 1192; waes se gryre laessa efne swa micle
swa bieth maegetha craeft be waepnedmen, _the terror was just so much less, as is
the strength of woman to the warrior_ (i.e. is valued by), 1285, etc.--2)
also local, but of motion from the subject in the direction of the object,
_on, upon, by_: gefeng be eaxle, _seized by the shoulder_, 1538; aledon
leofne þeoden be maeste, _laid the dear lord near the mast_, 36; be healse
genam, _took him by the neck, fell upon his neck_, 1873; waepen hafenade be
hiltum, _grasped the weapon by the hilt_, 1757, etc.--3) with this is
connected the causal force, _on account of, for, according to_: ic þis gid
be þe awraec, _I spake this solemn speech for thee, for thy sake_, 1724; þu
þe laer be þon, _learn according to this, from this_, 1723; be faeder lare,
_according to her father's direction_, 1951.--4) temporal, _while, during_:
be þe lifigendum, _while thou livest, during thy life_, 2666. See bi.

bed, st. n., _bed, couch_: acc. sg. bed, 140, 677; gen. sg. beddes, 1792;
dat. pl. beddum, 1241.--Comp: deaeth-, hlin-, laeger-, morethor-, wael-bed.

ge-bedde, w. f., _bed-fellow_: dat. sg. wolde secan ewen to gebeddan,
_wished to seek the queen as bed-fellow, to go to bed with her_,
666.--Comp. heals-gebedde.

begen, fem. ba, _both_: nom. m., 536, 770, 2708; acc. fem. on ba healfa,
_on two sides_ (i.e. Grendel and his mother), 1306; dat. m. bam, 2197; and
in connection with the possessive instead of the personal pronoun, urum
bam, 2661; gen. n. bega, 1874, 2896; bega gehwaeethres, _each one of the two_,
1044; bega folces, of _both peoples_, 1125.

ge-belgan, st. v. (properly, _to cause to swell, to swell_), _to irritate_:
w. dat. (pret. subj.) þaet he ecean dryhtne bitre gebulge, _that he had
bitterly angered the eternal Lord_, 2332; pret. part. gebolgen, 1540;
(gebolge, MS.), 2222; pl. gebolgne, 1432; more according to the original
meaning in torne gebolgen, 2402.

a-belgan, _to anger_: pret. sg. w. acc. oeth þaet hyne an abealh mon on mode,
_till a man angered him in his heart_, 2281; pret. part. abolgen, 724.

ben, st. f., _wound_: acc. sg. benne, 2725.--Comp.: feorh-, seax-ben.

benc, st. f., _bench_: nom. sg. benc, 492; dat. sg. bence, 327, 1014, 1189,
1244.--Comp.: ealu-, medu-benc.

benc-sweg, st. m., (_bench-rejoicing_), _rejoicing which resounds from the
benches_, 1162.

benc-þel, st. n., _bench-board, the wainscotted space where the benches
stand_: nom. pl. benc-þelu, 486; acc. pl. bencþelu beredon, _cleared the
bench-boards_ (i.e. by taking away the benches, so as to prepare couches),
1240.

bend, st. m. f., _bond, fetter_: acc. sg. forstes bend, _frost's bond_,
1610; dat. pl. bendum, 978.--Comp.: fyr-, hell-, hyge-, iren-, oncer-,
searo-, wael-bend.

ben-geat, st. n., (_wound-gate_), _wound-opening_: nom. pl. ben-geato,
1122.

bera (O.N. beri), w. m., _bearer_: in comp. hleor-bera.

beran, st. v. w. acc., _to carry_; III. sg. pres. byreeth, 296, 448; þone
maethethum byreeth, _carries the treasure_ (upon his person), 2056; pres. subj.
bere, 437; pl. beren, 2654; inf. beran, 48, 231, 291, etc.; heht þa se
hearda Hrunting beran, _to bring Hrunting_, 1808; up beran, 1921; in beran,
2153; pret. baer, 495, 712, 847, etc.; mandryhtne baer faeted waege, _brought
the lord the costly vessel_, 2282; pl. baeron, 213, 1636, etc.; baeran, 2851;
pret. part. boren, 1193, 1648, 3136.--The following expressions are poetic
paraphrases of the forms _go, come_: þaet we rondas beren eft to earde,
2654; gewitaeth foreth beran waepen and gewaedu, 291; ic gefraegn sunu Wihstanes
hringnet beran, 2755; wigheafolan baer, 2662; helmas baeron, 240
(conjecture); scyldas baeran, 2851: they lay stress upon the connection of
the man with his weapons.

aet-beran, _to carry to_: inf. to beadulace (_battle_) aetberan, 1562; pret.
þa hine on morgentid on Heaethoraemas holm up aetbaer, _the sea bore him up to
the Heaethoraemas_, 519; hio Beowulfe medoful aetbaer _brought Beowulf the
mead-cup_, 625; maegenbyrethenne ... hider ut aetbaer cyninge minum, _bore the
great burden hither to my king_, 3093; pl. hi hyne aetbaeron to brimes
faroethe, 28.

for-beran, _to hold, to suppress_: inf. þaet he þone breostwylm forberan ne
mehte, _that he could not suppress the emotions of his breast_, 1878.

ge-beran, _to bring forth, to bear_: pret. part. þaet la maeg secgan se þe
soeth and riht fremeeth on folce ... þaet þes eorl waere geboren betera (_that
may every just man of the people say, that this nobleman is better born_),
1704.

oeth-beran, _to bring hither_: pret. þa mec sae oethbaer on Finna land, 579.

on-beran (O.H.G. in beran, intperan, but in the sense of carere), auferre,
_to carry off, to take away_: inf. iren aergod þaet þaes ahlaecan blodge
beadufolme onberan wolde, _excellent sword which would sweep off the bloody
hand of the demon_, 991; pret. part. (waes) onboren beaga hord, _the
treasure of the rings had been carried off_, 2285.--Compounds with the
pres. part.: helm-, sawl-berend.

berian (denominative from baer, _naked_), w. v., _to make bare, to clear_:
pret. pl. bencþelu beredon, _cleared the bench-place_ (by removing the
benches), 1240.

berstan, st. v., _to break, to burst_: pret. pl. burston banlocan, 819;
bengeato burston, 1122.--_to crack, to make the noise of breaking_: fingras
burston, _the fingers cracked_ (from Beowulf's gripe), 761.

for-berstan, _break, to fly asunder_: pret. Naegling forbaerst, _Naegling_
(Beowulf's sword) _broke in two_, 2681.

betera, adj. (comp.), _better_: nom. sg. m. betera, 469, 1704.

bet-lic, adj., _excellent, splendid_: nom. sg. n., of Hroethgar's hall, 781;
of Hygelac's residence, 1926.

betst, betost (superl.), _best, the best_: nom. sg. m. betst beadurinca,
1110; neut. nu is ofost betost, þaet we ..., _now is haste the best, that
we..._, 3008; voc. m. secg betsta, 948; neut. acc. beaduscruda betst, 453;
acc. sg. m. þegn betstan, 1872.

becn, st. n., _(beacon), token, mark, sign_: acc. sg. betimbredon
beadu-rofes becn (of Beowulf's grave-mound), 3162. See beacen.

beg. See beag.

ben, st. f., _entreaty_: gen. sg. bene, 428, 2285.

bena, w. m., _suppliant_, supplex: nom. sg. swa þu bena eart (_as thou
entreatest_), 352; swa he bena waes (_as he had asked_), 3141; nom. pl. hy
benan synt, 364.

ge-betan: 1) _to make good, to remove_: pret. ac þu Hroethgare widcuethne wean
wihte gebettest, _hast thou in any way relieved Hroethgar of the evil known
afar_, 1992; pret. part. acc. sg. swylce oncyethethe ealle gebette, _removed
all trouble_, 831. --2) _to avenge_: inf. wihte ne meahte on þam feorhbonan
faehethe gebetan, _could in no way avenge the death upon the slayer_, 2466.

beadu, st. f., _battle, strife, combat_: dat. sg. (as instr.) beadwe, _in
combat_, 1540; gen. pl. bad beadwa ge-þinges, _waited for the combats_
(with Grendel) _that were in store for him_, 710.

beadu-folm, st. f., _battle-hand_: acc. sg. -folme, of Grendel's hand, 991.

beado-grima, w. m., _(battle-mask), helmet_: acc. pl. -griman, 2258.

beado-hraegl, st. n., _(battle-garment), corselet, shirt of mail_, 552.

beadu-lac, st. n., (_exercise in arms, tilting_), _combat, battle_: dat.
sg. to beadu-lace, 1562.

beado-leoma, w. m., (_battle-light_), _sword_: nom. sg., 1524.

beado-mece, st. m., _battle-sword_: nom. pl. beado-mecas, 1455.

beado-rinc, st. m., _battle-hero, warrior_: gen. pl. betst beadorinca,
1110.

beadu-rof, adj., _strong in battle_: gen. sg. -rofes, of Beowulf, 3162.

beadu-run, st. f., _mystery of battle_: acc. sg. onband beadu-rune, _solved
the mystery of the combat_, i.e. gave battle, commenced the fight, 501.

beadu-scearp, adj., _battle-sharp, sharp for the battle_, 2705.

beadu-scrud, st. n., (_battle-dress_), _corselet, shirt of mail_: gen. pl.
beaduscruda betst, 453.

beadu-serce, w. f., (_battle-garment_), _corselet, shirt of mail_: acc. sg.
brogdne beadu-sercean (because it consists of interlaced metal rings),
2756.

beado-weorc, st. n., (_battle-work_), _battle_: gen. sg. gefeh
beado-weorces, _rejoiced at the battle_, 2300.

beald, adj., _bold, brave_: in comp. cyning-beald.

bealdian, w. v., _to show one's self brave_: pret. bealdode godum daedum
(_through brave deeds_), 2178.

bealdor, st. m., _lord, prince_: nom. sg. sinca baldor, 2429; winia
bealdor, 2568.

bealu, st. n., _evil, ruin, destruction_: instr. sg. bealwe, 2827; gen. pl.
bealuwa, 281; bealewa, 2083; bealwa, 910.--Comp.: cwealm-, ealdor-,
hreether-, leod-, morethor-, niht-, sweord-, wig-bealu.

bealu, adj., _deadly, dangerous, bad_: instr. sg. hyne sar hafaeth befongen
balwon bendum, _pain has entwined him in deadly bands_, 978.

bealo-cwealm, st. m., _violent death, death by the sword_(?), 2266.

bealo-hycgende, pres. part., _thinking of death, meditating destruction_:
gen. pl. aeghwaeethrum bealo-hycgendra, 2566.

bealo-hydig, adj., _thinking of death, meditating destruction_: of Grendel,
724.

bealo-nieth, st. m., (_zeal for destruction_), _deadly enmity_: nom. sg.,
2405; _destructive struggle_: acc. sg. bebeorh þe þone bealonieth, _beware of
destructive striving_, 1759; _death-bringing rage_: nom. sg. him on
breostum bealo-nieth weoll, _in his breast raged deadly fury_ (of the
dragon's poison), 2715.

bearhtm (see beorht): 1) st. m., _splendor, brightness, clearness_: nom.
sg. eagena bearhtm, 1767.--2) _sound, tone_: acc. sg. bearhtm ongeaton,
guethhorn galan, _they heard the sound, (heard) the battle-horn sound_, 1432.

bearm, m., gremium, sinus, _lap, bosom_: nom. sg. foldan bearm, 1138; acc.
sg. on bearm scipes, 35, 897; on bearm nacan, 214; him on bearm hladan
bunan and discas, 2776.--2) figuratively, _possession, property_, because
things bestowed were placed in the lap of the receiver (1145 and 2195, on
bearm licgan, alecgan); dat. sg. him to bearme cwom maethethumfaet maere, _came
into his possession_, 2405.

bearn, st. n., 1) _child, son_: nom. sg. bearn Healfdenes, 469, etc.;
Ecglafes bearn, 499, etc.; dat. sg. bearne, 2371; nom. pl. bearn, 59; dat.
pl. bearnum, 1075.--2) in a broader sense, _scion, offspring, descendant_:
nom. sg. Ongenþeow's bearn, of his grandson, 2388; nom. pl. yldo. bearn,
70; gumena bearn, _children of men_, 879; haeleetha bearn, 1190; aeethelinga
bearn, 3172; acc. pl. ofer ylda bearn, 606; dat. pl. ylda bearnum, 150;
gen. pl. niethetha bearna, 1006.--Comp.: broethor-, dryht-bearn.

bearn-gebyrdu, f., _birth, birth of a son_: gen. sg. þaet hyre ealdmetod
este waere bearn-gebyrdo, _has been gracious through the birth of such a
son_ (i.e. as Beowulf), 947.

bearu, st. m., (_the bearer_, hence properly only the fruit-tree,
especially the oak and the beech), _tree_, collectively _forest_: nom. pl.
hrimge bearwas, _rime-covered_ or _ice-clad_, 1364.

beacen, st. n., _sign, banner_, vexillum: nom. sg. beorht beacen godes, _of
the sun_, 570; gen. pl. beacna beorhtost, 2778. See becn.

ge-beacnian, w. v., _to mark, to indicate_: pret. part. ge-beacnod, 140.

beag, st. m., _ring, ornament_: nom. sg. beah (_neck-ring_), 1212; acc. sg.
beah (the collar of the murdered king of the Heaethobeardnas), 2042; beg
(collective for the acc. pl.), 3165; dat. sg. cwom Wealhþeo foreth gan under
gyldnum beage, _she walked along under a golden head-ring, wore a golden
diadem_, 1164; gen. sg. beages (of a collar), 1217; acc. pl. beagas (rings
in general), 80, 523, etc.; gen. pl. beaga, 35, 352, 1488, 2285, etc.--
Comp.: earm-, heals-beag.

beag-gyfa, w. m., _ring-giver_, designation of the prince: gen. sg. -gyfan,
1103.

beag-hroden, adj., _adorned with rings, ornamented with clasps_: nom. sg.
beaghroden, cwen, of Hroethgar's consort, perhaps with reference to her
diadem (cf. 1164), 624.

beah-hord, st. m. n., _ring-hoard, treasure consisting of rings_: gen. sg.
beah-hordes, 895; dat. pl. beah-hordum, 2827; gen. pl. beah-horda weard, of
King Hroethgar, 922.

beah-sele, st. m., _ring-hall, hall in which the rings were distributed_:
nom. sg., of Heorot, 1178.

beah-þegu, st. f., _the receiving of the ring_: dat. sg. aefter beah-þege,
2177.

beah-wrietha, w. m. _ring-band_, ring with prominence given to its having the
form of a band: acc. sg. beah-wriethan, 2019.

beam, st. m., _tree_, only in the compounds fyrgen-, gleo-beam.

beatan, st. v., _thrust, strike_: pres. sg. mearh burhstede beateeth, _the
steed beats the castle-ground_ (place where the castle is built), i.e. with
his hoofs, 2266; pret. part. swealt bille ge-beaten, _died, struck by the
battle-axe_, 2360.

beorh, st. m.: 1) _mountain, rock_: dat. sg. beorge, 211; gen. sg. beorges,
2525, 2756; acc. pl. beorgas, 222.--2) _grave-mound, tomb-hill_: acc. sg.
biorh, 2808; beorh, 3098, 3165. A grave-mound serves the drake as a retreat
(cf. 2277, 2412): nom. sg. beorh, 2242; gen. sg. beorges, 2323.--Comp.
stan-beorh.

beorh, st. f., _veil, covering, cap_; only in the comp. heafod-beorh.

beorgan, st. v. (w. dat. of the interested person or thing), _to save, to
shield_: inf. wolde feore beorgan, _place her life in safety_, 1294;
here-byrne ... seo þe bancofan beorgan cuethe, _which could protect his
body_, 1446; pret. pl. ealdre burgan, 2600.

be-beorgan (w. dat. refl. of pers. and acc. of the thing), _to take care,
to defend one's self from_: inf. him be-beorgan ne con wom, _cannot keep
himself from stain_ (fault), 1747; imp. bebeorh þe þone bealonteth, 1759.

ge-beorgan (w, dat. of person or thing to be saved), _to save, to protect_:
pret. sg. þaet gebearh feore, _protected the life_, 1549; scyld wel gebearg
life and lice, 2571.

ymb-beorgan, _to surround protectingly_: pret. sg. bring utan ymb-bearh,
1504.

beorht, byrht, adj.: 1) _gleaming, shining, radiant, shimmering_: nom. sg.
beorht, of the sun, 570, 1803; beorhta, of Heorot, 1178; þaet beorhte bold,
998; acc. sg. beorhtne, of Beowulf's grave-mound, 2804; dat. sg. to þaere
byrhtan (here-byrhtan, MS.) byrig, 1200; acc. pl. beorhte fraetwe, 214, 897;
beorhte randas, 231; bordwudu beorhtan, 1244; n. beorht hofu, 2314.
Superl.: beacna beorhtost, 2778. --2) _excellent, remarkable_: gen. sg.
beorhtre bote, 158. --Comp.: sadol-, wlite-beorht.

beorhte, adv., _brilliantly, brightly, radiantly_, 1518.

beorhtian, w. v., _to sound clearly_: pret. sg. beorhtode benc-sweg, 1162.

beorn, st. m., _hero, warrior, noble man_: nom. sg. (Hroethgar), 1881,
(Beowulf), 2434, etc.; acc. sg. (Beow.), 1025, (Aeschere), 1300; dat. sg.
beorne, 2261; nom. pl. beornas (Beowulf and his companions), 211,
(Hroethgar's guests), 857; gen. pl. biorna (Beowulf's liege-men),
2405.--Comp.: folc-, gueth-beorn.

beornan, st. v., _to burn_: pres. part. byrnende (of the drake),
2273.--Comp. un-byrnende.

for-beornan, _to be consumed, to burn_: pret. sg. for-barn, 1617, 1668;
for-born, 2673.

ge-beornan, _to be burned_: pret. gebarn, 2698.

beorn-cyning, st. m., _king of warriors, king of heroes_: nom. sg. (as
voc.), 2149.

beodan, st. v.: 1) _to announce, to inform, to make known_: inf. biodan,
2893.--2) _to offer, to proffer_ (as the notifying of a transaction in
direct reference to the person concerned in it): pret. pl. him geþingo
budon, _offered them an agreement_, 1086; pret. part. þa waes aeht boden
Sweona leodum, _then was pursuit offered the Swedish people_, 2958; inf. ic
þaem godan sceal maethmas beodan, _I shall offer the excellent man treasures_,
385.

a-beodan, _to present, to announce_: pret. word inne abead, _made known the
words within_, 390; _to offer, to tender, to wish_: pret. him hael abead,
_wished him health_ (greeted him), 654. Similarly, haelo abead, 2419; eoton
weard abead, _offered the giant a watcher_, 669.

be-beodan, _to command, to order_: pret. swa him se hearda bebead, _as the
strong man commanded them_, 401. Similarly, swa se rica bebead, 1976.

ge-beodan: 1) _to command, to order_: inf. het þa gebeodan byre Wihstanes
haeleetha monegum, þaet hie..., _the son of Wihstan caused orders to be given
to many of the men..._, 3111.--2) _to offer_: him Hygd gebead hord and
rice, _offered him the treasure and the chief power_, 2370; inf. guethe
gebeodan, _to offer battle_, 604.

beod-geneat, st. m., _table-companion_: nom. and acc. pl. geneatas, 343,
1714.

beon, verb, _to be_, generally in the future sense, _will be_: pres. sg. I.
guethgeweorca ic beo gearo sona, _I shall immediately be ready for warlike
deeds_, 1826; sg. III. wa bieth þaem þe sceal..., _woe to him who_...! 183;
so, 186; gifeethe bieth is given, 299; ne bieth þe wilna gad (_no wish will be
denied thee_), 661; þaer þe bieth manna þearf, _if thou shalt need the
warriors_, 1836; ne bieth swylc cwenlic þeaw, _is not becoming, honorable to
a woman_, 1941; eft sona bieth _will happen directly_, 1763; similarly, 1768,
etc.; pl. þonne bioeth brocene, _then are broken_, 2064; feor cyethethe beoeth
selran gesohte þam þe..., "terrae longinquae meliores sunt visitatu ei
qui..." (Grein), 1839; imp. beo (bio) þu on ofeste, _hasten!_ 386, 2748;
beo wieth Geatas glaed, _be gracious to the Geatas_, 1174.

beor, st. n., _beer_: dat. sg. aet beore, _at beer-drinking_, 2042; instr.
sg. beore druncen, 531; beore druncne, 480.

beor-scealc, st. m., _keeper of the beer, cup-bearer_: gen. pl.
beor-scealca sum (one of Hroethgar's followers, because they served the
Geatas at meals), 1241.

beor-sele, st. m., _beer-hall, hall in which beer is drunk_: dat. sg. in
(on) beorsele, 482, 492, 1095; biorsele, 2636.

beor-þegu, st. f., _beer-drinking, beer-banquet_: dat. sg. aefter beorþege,
117; aet þaere beorþege, 618.

beot, st. n., _promise, binding agreement to something that is to be
undertaken_: acc. sg. he beot ne aleh, _did not break his pledge_, 80; beot
eal ... gelaeste, _performed all that he had pledged himself to_, 523.

ge-beotian, w. v., _to pledge one's self to an undertaking, to bind one's
self_: pret. gebeotedon, 480, 536.

beot-word, st. n., same as beot: dat. pl. beot-wordum spraec, 2511.

biddan, st. v., _to beg, to ask, to pray_: pres. sg. I. doeth swa ic bidde!
1232; inf. (w. acc. of the pers. and gen. of the thing asked for) ic þe
biddan wille anre bene, _beg thee for one_, 427; pret. swa he selfa baed,
_as he himself had requested_, 29; baed hine bliethne (supply wesan) aet þaere
beorþege, _begged him to be cheerful at the beer-banquet_, 618; ic þe lange
baed þaet þu..., _begged you a long time that you_, 1995; frioethowaere baed
hlaford sinne, _begged his lord for protection_ (acc. of pers. and gen. of
thing), 2283; baed þaet ge geworhton, _asked that you_..., 3097; pl. wordum
baedon þaet..., 176.

on-bidian, w. v., _to await_: inf. laetaeth hilde-bord her onbidian ... worda
geþinges, _let the shields await here the result of the conference_ (lay
the shields aside here), 397.

bil, st. n. _sword_: nom. sg. bil, 1568; bill, 2778; acc. sg. bil, 1558;
instr. sg. bille, 2360; gen. sg. billes, 2061, etc.; instr. pl. billum, 40;
gen. pl. billa, 583, 1145.--Comp.: gueth-, hilde-, wig-bil.

bindan, st. v., _to bind, to tie_: pret. part. acc. sg. wudu bundenne, _the
bound wood_, i.e. the built ship, 216; bunden golde swurd, _a sword bound
with gold_, i.e. either having its hilt inlaid with gold, or having gold
chains upon the hilt (swords of both kinds have been found), 1901; nom. sg.
heoru bunden, 1286, has probably a similar meaning.

ge-bindan, _to bind_: pret. sg. þaer ic fife geband, _where I had bound
five_(?), 420; pret. part. cyninges þegn word oether fand soethe gebunden, _the
king's man found_ (after many had already praised Beowulf's deed) _other
words_ (also referring to Beowulf, but in connection with Sigemund)
_rightly bound together_, i.e. in good alliterative verses, as are becoming
to a gid, 872; wundenmael wraettum gebunden, _sword bound with ornaments_,
i.e. inlaid, 1532; bisgum gebunden, _bound together by sorrow_, 1744; gomel
guethwiga eldo gebunden, _hoary hero bound by old age_ (fettered, oppressed),
2112.

on-bindan, _to unbind, to untie, to loose_: pret. onband, 501.

ge-bind, st. n. coll., _that which binds, fetters_: in comp. is-gebind.

bite, st. m., _bite_, figuratively of the cut of the sword: acc. sg. bite
irena, _the swords' bite_, 2260; dat. sg. aefter billes bite, 2061.--Comp.
laeth-bite.

biter (primary meaning that of biting), adj.: 1) _sharp, cutting, cutting
in_: acc. sg. biter (of a short sword), 2705; instr. sg. biteran straele,
1747; instr. pl. biteran banum, _with sharp teeth_, 2693.--2) _irritated,
furious_: nom. pl. bitere, 1432.

bitre, adv., _bitterly_ (in a moral sense), 2332.

bi, big (fuller form of the prep. be, which see), prep. w. dat.: 1) _near,
at, on, about, by_ (as under be, No. 1): bi saem tweonum, _in the circuit of
both seas_, 1957; aras bi ronde, _raised himself up by the shield_, 2539;
bi wealle gesaet, _sat by the wall_, 2718. With a freer position: him big
stodan bunan and orcas, _round about him_, 3048.--2) _to, towards_
(motion): hwearf þa bi bence, _turned then towards the bench_, 1189; geong
bi sesse, _went to the seat_, 2757.

bid (see bidan), st. n., _tarrying hesitation_: þaer weareth Ongenþio on bid
wrecen, _forced to tarry_, 2963.

bidan, st. v.: 1) _to delay, to stay, to remain, to wait_: inf. no on
wealle leng bidan wolde, _would not stay longer within the wall_ (the
drake), 2309; pret. in þystrum bad, _remained in darkness_, 87; flota
stille bad, _the craft lay still_, 301; receda ... on þaem se rica bad,
_where the mighty one dwelt_, 310; þaer se snottra bad, _where the wise man_
(Hroethgar) _waited_, 1314; he on searwum bad, _he_ (Beowulf) _stood there
armed_, 2569; ic on earde bad maelgesceafta, _lived upon the paternal ground
the time appointed me by fate_, 2737; pret. pl. sume þaer bidon, _some
remained, waited there_, 400.--2) _to await, to wait for_, with the gen. of
that which is awaited: inf. bidan woldon Grendles guethe, _wished to await
the combat with Grendel, to undertake it_, 482; similarly, 528; wiges
bidan, _await the combat_, 1269; nalas andsware bidan wolde, _would await
no answer_, 1495; pret. bad beadwa geþinges, _awaited the event of the
battle_, 710; saegenga bad agend-frean, _the sea-goer_ (boat) _awaited its
owner_, 1883; sele ... heaethowylma bad, laethan liges (the poet probably means
to indicate by these words that the hall Heorot was destroyed later in a
fight by fire; an occurrence, indeed, about which we know nothing, but
which 1165 and 1166, and again 2068 ff. seem to indicate), 82.

a-bidan, _to await_, with the gen.: inf., 978.

ge-bidan: 1) _to tarry, to wait_: imp. gebide ge on beorge, _wait ye on the
mountain_, 2530; pret. part. þeah þe wintra lyt under burhlocan gebiden
haebbe Haereethes dohtor _although H's daughter had dwelt only a few years in
the castle_, 1929.--2) _to live through, to experience, to expect_ (w.
acc.): inf. sceal endedaeg minne gebidan, _shall live my last day_, 639; ne
wende ... bote gebidan, _did not hope ... to live to see reparation_, 935;
fela sceal gebidan leofes and laethes, _experience much good and much
affliction_, 1061; ende gebidan, 1387, 2343; pret. he þaes frofre gebad,
_received consolation_ (compensation) _therefore_, 7; gebad wintra worn,
_lived a great number of years_, 264; in a similar construction, 816, 930,
1619, 2259, 3117. With gen.: inf. to gebidanne oethres yrfeweardes, _to await
another heir_, 2453. With depend, clause: inf. to gebidanne þaet his byre
ride on galgan, _to live to see it, that his son hang upon the gallows_,
2446; pret. dream-leas gebad þaet he..., _joyless he experienced it, that
he_..., 1721; þaes þe ic on aldre gebad þaet ic..., _for this, that I, in my
old age, lived to see that_..., 1780.

on-bidan, _to wait, to await_: pret. hordweard onbad earfoethlice oeth þaet aefen
cwom, _scarcely waited, could scarcely delay till it was evening_, 2303.

bitan, st. v., _to bite_, of the cutting of swords: inf. bitan, 1455, 1524;
pret. bat banlocan, _bit into his body_ (Grendel), 743; bat unswiethor, _cut
with less force_ (Beowulf's sword), 2579.

blanca, w. m., properly _that which shines_ here of the horse, not so much
of the white horse as the dappled: dat. pl. on blancum, 857.

ge-bland, ge-blond, st. n., _mixture, heaving mass, a turning_.--Comp.:
sund-, yeth-geblond, windblond.

blanden-feax, blonden-feax, adj., _mixed_, i.e. having gray hair,
_gray-headed_, as epithet of an old man: nom. sg. blondenfeax, 1792;
blondenfexa, 2963; dat. sg. blondenfeaxum, 1874; nom. pl. blondenfeaxe,
1595.

blaec, adj., _dark, black_: nom. sg, hrefn blaca, 1802.

blac, adj.: 1) _gleaming, shining_: acc. sg. blacne leoman, _a brilliant
gleam_, 1518.--2) of the white death-color, _pale_; in comp. heoroblac.

blaed, st. m.: 1) _strength, force, vigor_: nom. sg. waes hira blaed scacen
(of both tribes), _strength was gone_, i.e. the bravest of both tribes lay
slain, 1125; nu is þines maegnes blaed ane hwile, _now the fulness of thy
strength lasts for a time_, 1762.--2) _reputation, renown, knowledge_ (with
stress upon the idea of filling up, spreading out): nom. sg. blaed, 18;
(þin) blaed is araered, _thy renown is spread abroad_, 1704.

blaed-agend, pt., _having renown, renowned_: nom. pl. blaed-agende, 1014.

blaed-faest, adj., _firm in renown, renowned, known afar_: acc. sg.
blaedfaestne beorn (of Aeschere, with reference to 1329), 1300.

bleat, adj., _miserable, helpless_; only in comp. wael-bleat.

bleate, adv., _miserably, helplessly_, 2825.

blican, st. v., _shine, gleam_: inf., 222

bliethe, adj.: 1) _blithe, joyous, happy_ acc. sg. bliethne, 618.--2)
_gracious, pleasing_: nom. sg. bliethe, 436.--Comp. un-bliethe.

blieth-heort, adj., _joyous in heart, happy_: nom. sg., 1803.

blod, st. n., _blood_: nom. sg., 1122; acc. sg., 743; dat. sg. blode, 848;
aefter deorum men him langaeth beorn wieth blode, _the hero_ (Hroethgar) _longs
for the beloved man contrary to blood_, i.e. he loves him although he is
not related to him by blood, 1881; dat. as instr. blode, 486, 935, 1595,
etc.

blod-fag, adj., _spotted with blood, bloody_, 2061.

blodig, adj., _bloody_: acc. sg. f. blodge, 991; acc. sg. n. blodig, 448;
instr. sg. blodigan gare, 2441.

ge-blodian, w. v., _to make bloody, to sprinkle with blood_: pret. part.
ge-blodegod, 2693.

blodig-toeth, adj., _with bloody teeth_: nom. sg. bona blodig-toeth (of
Grendel, because he bites his victims to death), 2083.

blod-reow, adj., _bloodthirsty, bloody-minded_: nom. sg. him on ferhethe
greow breost-hord blod-reow, _in his bosom there grew a bloodthirsty
feeling_, 1720.

be-bod, st. n., _command, order_; in comp. wundor-bebod.

bodian, w. v., _(to be a messenger), to announce, to make known_: pret.
hrefn blaca heofones wynne blieth-heort bodode, _the black raven announced
joyfully heaven's delight_ (the rising sun), 1803.

boga, w. m., _bow_, of the bended form; here of the dragon, in comp.
hring-boga; as an instrument for shooting, in the comp. flan-, horn-boga;
bow of the arch, in comp. stan-boga.

bolca, w. m., "forus navis" (Grein), _gangway_; here probably the planks
which at landing are laid from the ship to the shore: acc. sg. ofer bolcan,
231.

bold, st. n., _building, house, edifice_: nom. sg. (Heorot), 998;
(Hygelac's residence), 1926; (Beowulfs residence), 2197, 2327.--Comp.
fold-bold.

bold-agend, pt., _house-owner, property-holder_: gen. pl. monegum
boldagendra, 3113.

bolgen-mod, adj., _angry at heart, angry_, 710, 1714.

bolster, st. m., _bolster, cushion, pillow_: dat. pl. (reced) geond-braeded
weareth beddum and bolstrum, _was covered with beds and bolsters_,
1241.--Comp. hleor-bolster.

bon-. See ban-.

bora, w. m., _carrier, bringer, leader_: in the comp. mund-, raed-,
waeg-bora.

bord, st. n., _shield_: nom. sg., 2674; acc. sg., 2525; gen. pl. ofer borda
gebraec, _over the crashing of the shields_, 2260.--Comp.: hilde-, wig-bord.

bord-haebbend, pt., _one having a shield, shield-bearer_: nom. pl. haebbende,
2896.

bord-hreoetha, w. m., _shield-cover, shield_ with particular reference to its
cover (of hides or linden bark): dat. sg. -hreoethan, 2204.

bord-rand, st. m., _shield_: acc. sg., 2560.

bord-weall, st. m., _shield-wall, wall of shields_: acc. sg., 2981.

bord-wudu, st. m., _shield-wood, shield_: acc. pl. beorhtan beord-wudu,
1244.

botm, st. m., _bottom_: dat. sg. to botme (here of the bottom of the
fen-lake), 1507.

bot (emendation, cf. betan), st. f.: 1) _relief, remedy_: nom. sg., 281;
acc. sg. bote, 935; acc. sg. bote, 910.--2) _a performance in expiation, a
giving satisfaction, tribute_: gen. sg. bote, 158.

brand, brond, st. m.: 1) _burning, fire_: nom. sg. þa sceal brond fretan
(_the burning of the body_), 3015; instr. sg. by hine ne moston ... bronde
forbaernan (_could not bestow upon him the solemn burning_), 2127; haefde
landwara lige befangen, baele and bronde, _with glow, fire, and flame_,
2323.--2) in the passage, þaet hine no brond ne beadomecas bitan ne meahton,
1455, brond has been translated _sword, brand_ (after the O.N. brand-r).
The meaning _fire_ may be justified as well, if we consider that the old
helmets were generally made of leather, and only the principal parts were
mounted with bronze. The poet wishes here to emphasize the fact that the
helmet was made entirely of metal, a thing which was very unusual.--3) in
the passage, forgeaf þa Beowulfe brand Healfdenes segen gyldenne, 1021, our
text, with other editions, has emendated, bearn, since brand, if it be
intended as a designation of Hroethgar (perhaps _son_), has not up to this
time been found in this sense in A.-S.

brant, bront, adj., _raging, foaming, going-high_, of ships and of waves:
acc. sg. brontne, 238, 568.

brad, adj.: 1) _extended, wide_: nom. pl. brade rice, 2208.--2) _broad_:
nom. sg. heah and brad (of Beowulf's grave-mound), 3159; acc. sg. bradne
mece, 2979; (seax) brad [and] brunecg, _the broad, short sword with bright
edge_, 1547.--3) _massive, in abundance_. acc, sg. brad gold, 3106.

ge-braec, st. n., _noise, crash_: acc. sg. borda gebraec, 2260.

geond-braedan, w. v., _to spread over, to cover entirely_: pret. part.
geond-braeded, 1240.

brecan, st. v.: 1) _to break, to break to pieces_: pret. banhringas braec,
(the sword) _broke the joints_, 1568. In a moral sense: pret. subj. þaet þaer
aenig mon waere ne braece, _that no one should break the agreement_, 1101;
pret. part. þonne bioeth brocene ... aeth-sweord eorla, _then are the oaths of
the men broken_, 2064.--2) probably also simply _to break in upon
something, to press upon_, w. acc.: pret. sg. saedeor monig hildetuxum
heresyrcan braec, _many a sea-animal pressed with his battle-teeth upon the
shirt of mail_ (did not break it, for, according to 1549 f., 1553 f., it
was still unharmed). 1512.--3) _to break out, to spring out_: inf. geseah
... stream ut brecan of beorge, _saw a stream break out from the rocks_,
2547; let se hearda Higelaces þegn bradne mece ... brecan ofer bordweal,
_caused the broadsword to spring out over the wall of shields_, 2981.--4)
figuratively, _to vex, not to let rest_: pret. hine fyrwyt braec, _curiosity
tormented_ (N.H.G. brachte die Neugier um), 232, 1986, 2785.

ge-brecan, _to break to pieces_: pret. banhus gebraec, _broke in pieces his
body_ (Beowulf in combat with Daeghrefn), 2509.

to-brecan, _to break in pieces_: inf., 781; pret. part. to-brocen, 998.

þurh-brecan, _to break through_, pret. wordes ord breosthord þurh-braec,
_the word's point broke through his closed breast_, i.e. a word burst out
from his breast, 2793.

breceth, st. f., _condition of being broken, breach_: nom. pl. modes brecetha
(_sorrow of heart_), 171.

a-bredwian, w. v. w. acc., _to fell to the ground, to kill_ (?): pret.
abredwade, 2620.

bregdan, st. v., properly _to swing round_, hence: 1) _to swing_: inf.
under sceadu bregdan, _swing among the shadows, to send into the realm of
shadows_, 708; pret. braegd ealde lafe, _swung the old weapon_, 796; braegd
feorh-geniethlan, _swung his mortal enemy_ (Grendel's mother), threw her
down, 1540; pl. git eagorstream ... mundum brugdon, _stirred the sea with
your hands_ (of the movement of the hands in swimming), 514; pret. part.
broden (brogden) mael, _the drawn sword_, 1617, 1668.--2) _to knit, to knot,
to plait_: inf., figuratively, inwitnet oethrum bregdan, _to weave a
waylaying net for another_ (as we say in the same way, to lay a trap for
another, to dig a pit for another), 2168; pret. part. beadohraegl broden, _a
woven shirt of mail_ (because it consisted of metal rings joined together),
552; similarly, 1549; brogdne beadusercean, 2756.

a-bregdan, _to swing_: pret. hond up a-braed, _swung, raised his hand_,
2576.

ge-bregdan: 1) _swing_: pret. hring-mael gebraegd, _swung the ringed sword_,
1565; eald sweord eacen ... þaet ic þy waepne gebraegd, _an old heavy sword
that I swung as my weapon_, 1665; with interchanging instr. and acc.
waellseaxe gebraed, biter and beadu-scearp, 2704; also, _to draw out of the
sheath_: sweord aer gebraed, _had drawn the sword before_, 2563.--2) _to
knit, to knot, to plait_: pret. part. bere-byrne hondum gebroden, 1444.

on-bregdan, _to tear open, to throw open_: pret. onbraed þa recedes muethan,
_had then thrown open the entrance of the hall_ (onbregdan is used because
the opening door swings upon its hinges), 724.

brego, st. m., _prince, ruler_: nom. sg. 427, 610.

brego-rof, adj., _powerful, like a ruler, of heroic strength_: nom. sg. m.,
1926.

brego-stol, st. m., _throne_, figuratively for _rule_: acc. sg. him
gesealde seofon þusendo, bold and brego-stol, _seven thousand_ see under
sceat), _a country-seat, and the dignity of a prince_, 2197; þaer him Hygd
gebead ... brego-stol, _where H. offered him the chief power_, 2371; let
þone bregostol Beowulf healdan, _gave over to Beowulf the chief power_ (did
not prevent Beowulf from entering upon the government), 2390.

breme, adj., _known afar, renowned_. nom. sg., 18.

brenting (see brant), st. m., _ship craft_: nom. pl. brentingas, 2808.

a-breatan, st. v., _to break, to break in pieces, to kill_: pret. abreot
brimwisan, _killed the sea-king_ (King Haeethcyn), 2931. See breotan.

breost, st. n.: 1) _breast_: nom. sg., 2177; often used in the pl., so acc.
þaet mine breost wereeth, _which protects my breast_, 453; dat. pl. beadohraegl
broden on breostum laeg. 552.--2) _the inmost thoughts, the mind, the heart,
the bosom_: nom. sg. breost innan weoll þeostrum geþoncum, _his breast
heaved with troubled thoughts_, 2332; dat. pl. let þa of breostum word ut
faran, _caused the words to come out from his bosom_, 2551.

breost-gehygd, st. n. f., _breast-thought, secret thought_: instr. pl.
-gehygdum, 2819.

breost-gewaedu, st. n. pl., _breast-clothing, garment covering the breast_,
of the coat of mail: nom., 1212; acc., 2163.

breost-hord, st. m., _breast-hoard, that which is locked in the breast,
heart, mind, thought, soul_: nom. sg., 1720; acc. sg., 2793.

breost-net, st. n., _breast-net, shirt of chain-mail, coat of mail_: nom.
sg. breost-net broden, 1549.

breost-weorethung, st. f., _ornament that is worn upon the breast_: acc. sg.
breost-weorethunge, 2505: here the collar is meant which Beowulf receives
from Wealhþeow (1196, 2174) as a present, and which B., according to 2173,
presents to Hygd, while, according to 1203, it is in the possession of her
husband Hygelac. In front the collar is trimmed with ornaments (fraetwe),
which hang down upon the breast, hence the name breost-weorethung.

breost-wylm, st. m., _heaving of the breast, emotion of the bosom_: acc.
sg, 1878.

breotan, st. v., _to break, to break in pieces, to kill_: pret. breat
beodgeneatas, _killed his table-companions_ (courtiers), 1714.

a-breotan, same as above: pret. þone þe heo on raeste abreat, _whom she
killed upon his couch_, 1299; pret. part. þa þaet monige geweareth, þaet hine
seo brimwylf abroten haefde, _many believed that the sea-wolf_ (Grendel's
mother) _had killed him_, 1600; hi hyne ... abroten haefdon, _had killed
him_ (the dragon), 2708.

brim, st. n., _flood, the sea_: nom. sg., 848, 1595; gen. sg. to brimes
faroethe, _to the sea_, 28; aet brimes nosan, _at the sea's promontory_, 2804;
nom. pl. brimu swaethredon, _the waves subsided_, 570.

brim-clif, st. n., _sea-cliff, cliff washed by the sea_: acc. pl. -clifu,
222.

brim-lad, st. f., _flood-way, sea-way_: acc. sg. þara þe mid Beowulfe
brimlade teah, _who had travelled the sea-way with B._, 1052.

brim-liethend, pt, _sea-farer, sailor_ acc. p. -liethende, 568.

brim-stream, st. m., _sea-stream, the flood of the sea_: acc. pl. ofer
brim-streamas, 1911.

brim-wisa, w. m., _sea-king_: acc. sg. brimwisan, of Haeethcyn, king of the
Geatas, 2931.

brim-wylf, st. f., _sea-wolf_ (designation of Grendel's mother): nom. sg.
seo brimwylf, 1507, 1600.

brim-wylm, st. m., _sea-wave_: nom. sg., 1495.

bringan, anom. v., _to bring, to bear_: prs. sg. I. ic þe þusenda þegna
bringe to helpe, _bring to your assistance thousands of warriors_, 1830;
inf. sceal hringnaca ofer heaethu bringan lac and luftacen, _shall bring
gifts and love-tokens over the high sea_, 1863; similarly, 2149, 2505;
pret. pl. we þas saelac ... brohton, _brought this sea-offering_ (Grendel's
head), 1654.

ge-bringan, _to bring_: pres. subj. pl. þat we þone gebringan ... on
adfaere, _that we bring him upon the funeral-pile_, 3010.

brosnian, w. v., _to crumble, to become rotten, to fall to pieces_: prs.
sg. III. herepad ... brosnaeth aefter beorne, _the coat of mail falls to
pieces after_ (the death of) _the hero_, 2261.

broethor, st. m., _brother_: nom. sg., 1325, 2441; dat sg. breether, 1263; gen.
sg. his broethor bearn, 2620; dat. pl. broethrum, 588, 1075.

ge-broethru, pl., _brethren, brothers_: dat. pl. saet be þaem gebroethrum twaem,
_sat by the two brothers_, 1192.

broga, w. m., _terror, horror_: nom. sg., 1292, 2325, 2566; acc. sg. billa
brogan, 583.--Comp.: gryre-, here-broga.

brucan, st. v. w. gen., _to use, to make use of_: prs. sg. III. se þe longe
her worolde bruceeth, _who here long makes use of the world_, i.e. lives
long, 1063; imp. bruc manigra meda, _make use of many rewards, give good
rewards_, 1179; _to enjoy_: inf. þaet he beahhordes brucan moste, _could
enjoy the ring-hoard_, 895; similarly, 2242, 3101; pret. breac
lifgesceafta, _enjoyed the appointed life, lived the appointed time_, 1954.
With the genitive to be supplied: breac þonne moste, 1488; imp. bruc þisses
beages, _enjoy this ring, take this ring_, 1217. Upon this meaning depends
the form of the wish, wel brucan (compare the German geniesze froh!): inf.
het hine wel brucan, 1046; het hine brucan well, 2813; imp. bruc ealles
well, 2163.

brun, adj., _having a brown lustre, shining_: nom. sg. sio ecg brun, 2579.

brun-ecg, adj., _having a gleaming blade_: acc. sg. n. (hyre seaxe) brad
[and] brunecg, _her broad sword with gleaming blade_, 1547.

brun-fag, adj., _gleaming like metal_: acc. sg. brunfagne helm, 2616.

bryne-leoma, w. m., _light of a conflagration, gleam of fire _: nom. sg.,
2314.

bryne-wylm, st. m., _wave of fire_: dat. pl. -wylmum, 2327.

brytnian (properly _to break in small pieces_, cf. breotan), w. v., _to
bestow, to distribute_: pret. sinc brytnade, _distributed presents_, i.e.
ruled (since the giving of gifts belongs especially to rulers), 2384.

brytta, w. m., _giver, distributer_, always designating the king: nom. sg.
sinces brytta, 608, 1171, 2072; acc. sg. beaga bryttan, 35, 352, 1488;
sinces bryttan, 1923.

bryttian (_to be a dispenser_), w. v., _to distribute, to confer_: prs. sg.
III. god manna cynne snyttru bryttaeth, _bestows wisdom upon the human race_,
1727.

bryd, st. f.: 1) _wife, consort_: acc. sg. bryd, 2931; bryde, 2957, both
times of the consort of Ongenþeow (?).--2) _betrothed, bride_: nom. sg., of
Hroethgar's daughter, Freaware, 2032.

bryd-bur, st. n., _woman's apartment_: dat. sg. eode ... cyning of
brydbure, _the king came out of the apartment of his wife_ (into which,
according to 666, he had gone), 922.

bunden-stefna, w. m., _(that which has a bound prow), the framed ship_:
nom. sg., 1911.

bune, w. f., _can_ or _cup, drinking-vessel_: nom. pl. bunan, 3048; acc.
pl. bunan, 2776.

burh, burg, st. f., _castle, city, fortified house_: acc. sg. burh, 523;
dat. sg. byrig, 1200; dat. pl. burgum, 53, 1969, 2434.--Comp.: freo,
freoetho-, hea-, hleo-, hord-, leod-, maeg-burg.

burh-loca, w. m., _castle-bars_: dat. sg. under burh-locan, _under the
castle-bars_, i.e. in the castle (Hygelac's), 1929.

burh-stede, st. m., _castle-place, place where the castle_ or _city
stands_: acc. sg. burhstede, 2266.

burh-wela, w. m., _riches, treasure of a castle_ or _city_: gen. sg. þenden
he burh-welan brucan moste, 3101.

burne, w. f., _spring, fountain_: gen. þaere burnan waelm, _the bubbling of
the spring_, 2547.

buan, st. v.: 1) _to stay, to remain, to dwell_: inf. gif he weard onfunde
buan on beorge, _if he had found the watchman dwelling on the mountain_,
2843.--2) _to inhabit_, w. acc.: meduseld buan, _to inhabit the
mead-house_, 3066.

ge-buan, w. acc., _to occupy a house, to take possession_: pret. part. hean
huses, hu hit Hring Dene aefter beorþege gebun haefdon, _how the Danes, after
their beer-carouse, had occupied it_ (had made their beds in it),
117.--With the pres. part. buend are the compounds ceaster-, fold-, grund-,
lond-buend.

bugan, st. v., _to bend, to bow, to sink; to turn, to flee_: prs. sg. III.
bon-gar bugeeth, _the fatal spear sinks_, i.e. its deadly point is turned
down, it rests, 2032; inf. þaet se byrnwiga bugan sceolde, _that the armed
hero had to sink down_ (having received a deadly blow), 2919; similarly,
2975; pret. sg. beah eft under eorethweall, _turned, fled again behind the
earth-wall_, 2957; pret. pl. bugon to bence, _turned to the bench_, 327,
1014; hy on holt bugon, _fled to the wood_, 2599.

a-bugan, _to bend off, to curve away from_: pret. fram sylle abeag medubenc
monig, _from the threshold curved away many a mead-bench_, 776.

be-bugan, w. acc., _to surround, to encircle_: prs. swa (_which_) waeter
bebugeeth, 93; efne swa side swa sae bebugeeth windige weallas, _as far as the
sea encircles windy shores_, 1224.

ge-bugan, _to bend, to bow, to sink_: a) intrans.: heo on flet gebeah,
_sank on the floor_, 1541; þa gebeah cyning, _then sank the king_, 2981; þa
se wyrm gebeah snude tosomne (_when the drake at once coiled itself up_),
2568; gewat þa gebogen scriethan to, _advanced with curved body_ (the drake),
2570.--b) w. acc. of the thing to which one bends or sinks: pret. selereste
gebeah, _sank upon the couch in the hall_, 691; similarly gebeag, 1242.

bur, st. n., _apartment, room_: dat. sg. bure, 1311, 2456; dat. pl. burum,
140.--Comp. bryd-bur.

butan, buton (from be and utan, hence in its meaning referring to what is
without, excluded): 1) conj. with subjunctive following, _lest_: butan his
lic swice, _lest his body escape_, 967. With ind. following, _but_: buton
hit waes mare þonne aenig mon oether to beadulace aetberan meahte, _but it_ (the
sword) _was greater than any other man could have carried to battle_, 1561.
After a preceding negative verb, _except_: þara þe gumena bearn gearwe ne
wiston buton Fitela mid hine, _which the children of men did not know at
all, except Fitela, who was with him_, 880; ne nom he maethm-aehta ma buton
þone hafelan, etc., _he took no more of the rich treasure than the head
alone_, 1615.--2) prep, with dat., _except_: buton folcscare, 73; buton þe,
658; ealle buton anum, 706.

bycgan, w. v., _to buy, to pay_: inf. ne waes þaet gewrixle til þaet hie on ba
healfa bicgan scoldon freonda feorum, _that was no good transaction, that
they, on both sides_ (as well to Grendel as to his mother), _had to pay
with the lives of their friends_, 1306.

be-bycgan, _to sell_: pret. nu ic on maethma hord mine bebohte frode
feorhlege (_now I, for the treasure-hoard, gave up my old life_), 2800.

ge-bycgan, _to buy, to acquire; to pay_: pret. w. acc. no þaer aenige ...
frofre gebohte, _obtained no sort of help, consolation_, 974; hit (his,
MS.) ealdre gebohte, _paid it with his life_, 2482; pret. part. sylfes
feore beagas [geboh]te, _bought rings with his own life_, 3015.

byldan, w. v. (_to make_ beald, which see), _to excite, to encourage, to
brave deeds_: inf. w. acc. swa he Fresena cyn on beorsele byldan wolde (by
distributing gifts), 1095.

ge-byrd, st. n., "fatum destinatum" (Grein) (?): acc. sg. hie on gebyrd
hruron gare wunde, 1075.

ge-byrdu, st. f., _birth_; in compound, bearn-gebyrdu.

byrdu-scrud, st. n., _shield-ornament, design upon a shield_(?): nom. sg.,
2661.

byre, st. m., (_born_) _son_: nom. sg., 2054, 2446, 2622, etc.; nom. pl.
byre, 1189. In a broader sense, _young man, youth_: acc. pl. baedde byre
geonge, _encouraged the youths_ (at the banquet), 2019.

byrethen, st. f., _burden_; in comp. maegen-byrethen.

byrele, st. m., _steward, waiter, cupbearer_: nom. pl. byrelas, 1162.

byrgan, w. v., _to feast, to eat_: inf., 448.

ge-byrgea, w. m., _protector_; in comp. leod-gebyrgea.

byrht. See _beorht_.

byrne, w. f., _shirt of mail, mail_: nom. sg. byrne, 405, 1630, etc.;
hringed byrne, _ring-shirt_, consisting of interlaced rings, 1246; acc. sg.
byrnan, 1023, etc.; side byrnan, _large coat of mail_, 1292; hringde
byrnan, 2616; hare byrnan, _gray coat of mail_ (of iron), 2154; dat. sg. on
byrnan, 2705; gen. sg. byrnan hring, _the ring of the shirt of mail_ (i.e.
the shirt of mail), 2261; dat. pl. byrnum, 40, 238, etc.; beorhtum byrnum,
_with gleaming mail_, 3141.--Comp.: gueth-, here-, heaetho-, iren-,
isern-byrne.

byrnend. See beornan.

byrn-wiga, w. m., _warrior dressed in a coat of mail_: nom. sg., 2919.

bysgu, bisigu, st. f., _trouble, difficulty, opposition_: nom. sg. bisigu,
281; dat. pl. bisgum, 1744, bysigum, 2581.

bysig, adj., _opposed, in need_, in the compounds lif-bysig, syn-bysig.

byme, w. f., _a wind-instrument, a trumpet, a trombone_: gen. sg. byman
gealdor, _the sound of the trumpet_, 2944.

bywan, w. v., _to ornament, to prepare_: inf. þa þe beado-griman bywan
sceoldon, _who should prepare the helmets_, 2258.


C

camp, st. m., _combat, fight between two_: dat. sg. in campe (Beowulf's
with Daeghrefn; cempan, MS.), 2506.

candel, st. f., _light, candle_: nom. sg. rodores candel, of the sun,
1573.--Comp. woruld-candel.

cempa, w. m., _fighter, warrior, hero_: nom. sg. aeethele cempa, 1313; Geata
cempa, 1552; reethe cempa, 1586; maere cempa (as voc.), 1762; gyrded cempa,
2079; dat. sg. geongum (geongan) cempan, 1949, 2045, 2627; Huga cempan,
2503; acc. pl. cempan, 206.--Comp. feethe-cempa.

cennan, w. v.: 1) _to bear_, w. acc.: efne swa hwylc maegetha swa þone magan
cende, _who bore the son_, 944; pret. part. þaem eafera waes aefter cenned,
_to him was a son born_, 12.--2) reflexive, _to show one's self, to reveal
one's self_: imp. cen þec mid craefte, _prove yourself by your strength_,
1220.

a-cennan, _to bear_: pret. part. no hie faeder cunnon, hwaeether him aenig waes
aer acenned dyrnra gasta, _they_ (the people of the country) _do not know
his_ (Grendel's) _father, nor whether any evil spirit has been before born
to him_ (whether he has begotten a son), 1357.

cenethu, st. f., _boldness_: acc. sg. cenethu, 2697.

cene, adj., _keen, warlike, bold_: gen. p.. cenra gehwylcum, 769. Superl.,
acc. pl. cenoste, 206.--Comp.: daed-, gar-cene.

ceald, adj., _cold_: acc. pl. cealde streamas, 1262; dat. pl. cealdum
cearsiethum, _with cold, sad journeys_, 2397. Superl. nom. sg. wedera
cealdost, 546;--Comp. morgen-ceald.

cearian, w. v., _to have care, to take care, to trouble one's self_: prs.
sg. III. na ymb his lif cearaeth, _takes no care for his life_, 1537.

cearig, adj., _troubled, sad_: in comp. sorh-cearig.

cear-sieth, st. m., _sorrowful way, an undertaking that brings sorrow_, i.e.
a warlike expedition: dat. pl. cearsiethum (of Beowulf's expeditions against
Eadgils), 2397.

cearu, st. f., _care, sorrow, lamentation_: nom. sg., 1304; acc. sg.
[ceare], 3173.--Comp.: ealdor-, gueth-, mael-, mod-cearu.

cear-waelm, st. m., _care-agitation, waves of sorrow in the breast_: dat.
pl. aefter cear-waelmum, 2067.

cear-wylm, st. m., same as above; nom. pl. þa cear-wylmas, 282.

ceaster-buend, pt, _inhabitant of a fortified place, inhabitant of a
castle_: dat. pl. ceaster-buendum, of those established in Hroethgar's
castle, 769.

ceap, st. m., _purchase, transaction_: figuratively, nom. sg. naes þaet yethe
ceap, _no easy transaction_, 2416; instr. sg. þeah þe oether hit ealdre
gebohte, heardan ceape, _although the one paid it with his life, a dear
purchase_, 2483.

ge-ceapian, w. v., _to purchase_: pret. part. gold unrime grimme geceapod,
_gold without measure, bitterly purchased_ (with Beowulf's life), 3013.

be-ceorfan, st. v., _to separate, to cut off_ (with acc. of the pers. and
instr. of the thing): pret. hine þa heafde becearf, _cut off his head_,
1591; similarly, 2139.

ceorl, st. m., _man_: nom. sg. snotor ceorl monig, _many a wise man_, 909;
dat. sg. gomelum ceorle, _the old man_ (of King Hreethel), 2445; so, ealdum
ceorle, of King Ongenþeow, 2973; nom. pl. snotere ceorlas, _wise men_, 202,
416, 1592.

ceol, st. m., _keel_, figuratively for the ship: nom. sg., 1913; acc. sg.
ceol, 38, 238; gen. sg. ceoles, 1807.

ceosan, st. v., _to choose_, hence, _to assume_: inf. þone cynedom ciosan
wolde, _would assume the royal dignity_, 2377; _to seek_: pret. subj. aer he
bael cure, _before he sought his funeral-pile_ (before he died), 2819.

ge-ceosan, _to choose, to elect_: gerund, to geceosenne cyning aenigne
(selran), _to choose a better king_, 1852; imp. þe þaet selre ge-ceos,
_choose thee the better_ (of two: bealonieth and ece raedas), 1759; pret. he
usic on herge geceas to þyssum siethfate, _selected us among the soldiers for
this undertaking_, 2639; geceas ecne raed, _chose the everlasting gain_,
i.e. died, 1202; similarly, godes leoht geceas, 2470; pret. part. acc. pl.
haefde ... cempan gecorone, 206.

on-cirran, w. v., _to turn, to change_: inf. ne meahte ... þaes wealdendes
[willan] wiht on-cirran, _could not change the will of the Almighty_, 2858;
pret. ufor oncirde, _turned higher_, 2952; þyder oncirde, _turned thither_,
2971.

a-cigan, w. v., _to call hither_: pret. acigde of corethre cyninges þegnas
syfone, _called from the retinue of the king seven men_, 3122.

clam, clom, st. m., f. n.? _fetter_, figuratively of a strong gripe: dat.
pl. heardan clammum, 964; heardum clammum, 1336; atolan clommum (horrible
claws of the mother of Grendel), 1503.

clif, cleof, st. n., _cliff, promontory_: acc. pl. Geata clifu,
1912.--Comp.: brim-, eg-, holm-, stan-clif.

ge-cnawan, st. v., _to know, to recognize_: inf. meaht þu, min wine, mece
gecnawan, _mayst thou, my friend, recognize the sword_, 2048.

on-cnawan, _to recognize, to distinguish_: hordweard oncniow mannes reorde,
_distinguished the speech of a man_, 2555.

cniht, st. m., _boy, youth_: dat. pl. þyssum cnyhtum, _to these boys_
(Hroethgar's sons), 1220.

cniht-wesende, prs. part., _being a boy_ or _a youth_: acc. sg. ic hine
cuethe cniht-wesende, _knew him while still a boy_, 372; nom. pl. wit þaet
gecwaedon cniht-wesende, _we both as young men said that_, 535.

cnyssan, w. v., _to strike, to dash against each other_: pret. pl. þonne
... eoferas cnysedan, _when the bold warriors dashed against each other,
stormed_ (in battle), 1329.

collen-ferheth, -fereth, adj., (properly, _of swollen mind_), _of uncommon
thoughts, in his way of thinking, standing higher than others,
high-minded_: nom. sg. cuma collen-ferheth, of Beowulf, 1807; collen-fereth, of
Wiglaf, 2786.

corether, st. n., _troop, division of an army, retinue_: dat. sg. þa waes ...
Fin slaegen, cyning on corethre, _then was Fin slain, the king in the troop_
(of warriors), 1154; of corethre cyninges, _out of the retinue of the king_,
3122.

costian, w. v., _to try_; pret. (w. gen.) he min costode, _tried me_, 2085.

cofa, w. m., _apartment, sleeping-room, couch_: in comp. ban-cofa.

col, adj., _cool_: compar. cearwylmas colran wurethaeth, _the waves of sorrow
become cooler_, i.e. the mind becomes quiet, 282; him wiflufan ... colran
weorethaeth, _his love for his wife cools_, 2067.

craeft, st. m., _the condition of being able_, hence: 1) _physical
strength_: nom. sg. maegetha craeft, 1284; acc. sg. maegenes craeft, 418; þurh
anes craeft, 700; craeft and cenethu, 2697; dat. (instr.) sg. craefte, 983,
1220, 2182, 2361.--2) _art, craft, skill_: dat. sg. as instr. dyrnum
craefte, _with secret_ (magic) _art_, 2169; dyrnan craefte, 2291; þeofes
craefte, _with thief's craft_, 2221; dat. pl. deofles craeftum, _by devil's
art_ (sorcery), 2089.--3) _great quantity_ (?): acc. sg. wyrm-horda craeft,
2223.--Comp.: leoetho-, maegen-, nearo-, wig-craeft.

craeftig, adj.: 1) _strong, stout_: nom. sg. eafoethes craeftig, 1467; nietha
craeftig, 1963. Comp. wig-craeftig.--2) _adroit, skilful_: in comp.
lagu-craeftig.--3) _rich_ (of treasures); in comp. eacen-craeftig.

cringan, st. v., _to fall in combat, to fall with the writhing movement of
those mortally wounded_: pret. subj. on wael crunge, _would sink into death,
would fall_, 636; pret. pl. for the pluperfect, sume on waele crungon, 1114.

ge-cringan, same as above: pret. he under rande gecranc, _fell under his
shield_, 1210; aet wige gecrang, _fell in battle_, 1338; heo on flet
gecrong, _fell to the ground_, 1569; in campe gecrong, _fell in single
combat_, 2506.

cuma (_he who comes_), w. m., _newcomer, guest_: nom. sg. 1807.--Comp.:
cwealm-, wil-cuma.

cuman, st. v., _to come_: pres. sg. II. gyf þu on weg cymest, _if thou
comest from there_, 1383; III. cymeeth, 2059; pres. subj. sg. III. cume, 23;
pl. þonne we ut cymen, _when we come out_, 3107; inf. cuman, 244, 281,
1870; pret. sg. com, 430, 569, 826, 1134, 1507, 1601, etc.; cwom, 419,
2915; pret. subj. sg. cwome, 732; pret. part. cumen, 376; pl. cumene, 361.
Often with the inf. of a verb of motion, as, com gongan, 711; com siethian,
721; com in gan, 1645; cwom gan, 1163; com scacan, 1803; cwomon laedan, 239;
cwomon secean, 268; cwoman scriethan, 651, etc. [pret. com, etc.]

be-cuman, _to come, to approach, to arrive_: pret. syethethan niht becom,
_after the night had come_, 115; þe on þa leode becom, _that had come over
the people_, 192; þa he to ham becom, 2993. And with inf. following: stefn
in becom ... hlynnan under harne stan, 2553; lyt eft becwom ... hames
niosan, 2366; oeth þaet ende becwom, 1255; similarly, 2117. With acc. of
pers.: þa hyne sio þrag becwom, _when this time of battle came over him_,
2884.

ofer-cuman, _to overcome, to compel_: pret. þy he þone feond ofercwom,
_thereby he overcame the foe_, 1274: pl. hie feond heora ... ofercomon,
700; pret. part. (w. gen.) nietha ofercumen, _compelled by combats_, 846.

cumbol, cumbor, st. m., _banner_: gen. sg. cumbles hyrde, 2506.--Comp.
hilte-cumbor.

cund, adj., _originating in, descended from_: in comp. feorran-cund.

cunnan, verb pret. pres.: 1) _to know, to be acquainted with_ (w. acc. or
depend, clause): sg. pres. I. ic minne can glaedne Hroethulf þaet he ... wile,
_I know my gracious H., that he will_..., 1181; II. eard git ne const,
_thou knowest not yet the land_, 1378; III. he þaet wyrse ne con, _knows no
worse_, 1740. And reflexive: con him land geare, _knows the land well_,
2063; pl. men ne cunnon hwyder helrunan scriethaeth, _men do not know
whither_..., 162; pret. sg. ic hine cuethe, _knew him_, 372; cuethe he dugueth
þeaw, _knew the customs of the distinguished courtiers_, 359; so with the
acc., 2013; seolfa ne cuethe þurh hwaet..., _he himself did not know through
what_..., 3068; pl. sorge ne cuethon, 119; so with the acc., 180, 418, 1234.
With both (acc. and depend. clause): no hie faeder cunnon (scil. no hie
cunnon) hwaeether him aenig waes aer acenned dyrnra gasta, 1356.--2) with inf.
following, _can, to be able_: prs. sg. him bebeorgan ne con, _cannot defend
himself_, 1747; prs. pl. men ne cunnon secgan, _cannot say_, 50; pret. sg.
cuethe reccan, 90; beorgan cuethe, 1446; pret. pl. herian ne cuethon, _could not
praise_, 182; pret. subj. healdan cuethe, 2373.

cunnian, w. v., _to inquire into, to try_, w. gen. or acc.: inf. sund
cunnian (figurative for _roam over the sea_), 1427, 1445; geongne cempan
higes cunnian, _to try the young warrior's mind_, 2046; pret. eard cunnode,
_tried the home_, i.e. came to it, 1501; pl. wada cunnedon, _tried the
flood_, i.e. swam through the sea, 508.

cueth, adj.: 1) _known, well known; manifest, certain_: nom. sg. undyrne cueth,
150, 410; wide cueth, 2924; acc. sg. fern. cuethe folme, 1304; cuethe straete,
1635; nom. pl. ecge cuethe, 1146; acc. pl. cuethe naessas, 1913.--2) _renowned_:
nom. sg. guethum cueth, 2179; nom. pl. cystum cuethe, 868.--3) also, _friendly,
dear, good_ (see un-cueth).--Comp.: un-, wid-cueth.

cueth-lice, adv., _openly, publicly_: comp. no her cuethlicor cuman ongunnon
lind-haebbende, _no shield-bearing men undertook more boldly to come hither_
(the coast-watchman means by this the secret landing of the Vikings), 244.

cwalu, st. f., _murder, fall_: in comp. deaeth-cwalu.

cweccan (_to make alive_, see cwic), w. v., _to move, to swing_: pret.
cwehte maegen-wudu, _swung the wood of strength_ (= spear), 235.

cweethan, st. v., _to say, to speak_: a) absolutely: prs. sg. III. cwieth aet
beore, _speaks at beer-drinking_, 2042.--b) w. acc.: pret. word aefter cwaeeth,
315; fea worda cwaeeth, 2247, 2663.--c) with þaet following: pret. sg. cwaeeth,
92, 2159; pl. cwaedon, 3182.--d) with þaet omitted: pret. cwaeeth he gueth-cyning
secean wolde, _said he would seek out the war-king_, 199; similarly, 1811,
2940.

a-cweethan, _to say, to speak_, w. acc.: prs. þaet word acwyeth, _speaks the
word_, 2047; pret. þaet word acwaeeth, 655.

ge-cweethan, _to say, to speak_: a) absolutely: pret. sg. II. swa þu gecwaede,
2665.--b)w. acc.: pret. wel-hwylc gecwaeeth, _spoke everything_, 875; pl. wit
þaet gecwaedon, 535.--c) w. þaet following: pret. gecwaeeth, 858, 988.

cwellan, w. v., (_to make die_), _to kill, to murder_: pret. sg. II. þu
Grendel cwealdest, 1335.

a-cwellan, _to kill_: pret. sg. (he) wyrm acwealde, 887; þone þe Grendel aer
mane acwealde, _whom Grendel had before wickedly murdered_, 1056; beorn
acwealde, 2122.

cwen, st. f.: 1) _wife, consort_ (of noble birth): nom. sg. cwen, 62;
(Hroethgar's), 614, 924; (Finn's), 1154.--2) particularly denoting the queen:
nom. sg. beaghroden cwen (Wealhþeow), 624; maeru cwen, 2017; fremu folces
cwen (Þryetho), 1933; acc. sg. cwen (Wealhþeow), 666.-Comp. folc-cwen.

cwen-lic, adj., _feminine, womanly_: nom. sg. ne bieth swylc cwenlic þeaw
(_such is not the custom of women, does not become a woman_), 1941.

cwealm, st. m., _violent death, murder, destruction_: acc. sg. þone cwealm
gewraec, _avenged the death_ (of Abel by Cain), 107; maendon mondryhtnes
cwealm, _lamented the ruler's fall_, 3150.--Comp.: bealo-, deaeth-,
gar-cwealm.

cwealm-bealu, st. n., _the evil of murder_: acc. sg., 1941.

cwealm-cuma, w. m., _one coming for murder, a new-comer who contemplates
murder_: acc. sg. þone cwealm-cuman (of Grendel), 793.

cwic and cwico, adj., _quick, having life, alive_: acc. sg. cwicne, 793,
2786; gen. sg. aht cwices, _something living_, 2315; nom. pl. cwice, 98;
cwico waes þa gena, _was still alive_, 3094.

cwide, st. m., _word, speech, saying_: in comp. gegn-, gilp-, hleo-, ethor-
[non-existant form--KTH], word-cwide.

cwiethan, st. v., _to complain, to lament_: inf. w. acc. ongan ... gioguethe
cwiethan hilde-strengo, _began to lament the_ (departed) _battle-strength of
his youth_, 2113 [ceare] cwiethan, _lament their cares_, 3173.

cyme, st. m., _coming, arrival_: nom. pl. hwanan eowre cyme syndon, _whence
your coming is_, i. e. whence ye are, 257.--Comp. eft-cyme.

cymlice, adv., (convenienter), _splendidly, grandly_: comp. cymlicor, 38.

cyn, st. n., _race_, both in the general sense, and denoting noble lineage:
nom. sg. Fresena cyn, 1094; Wedera (gara, MS.) cyn, 461; acc. sg. eotena
cyn, 421; giganta cyn, 1691; dat. sg. Caines cynne, 107; manna cynne, 811,
915, 1726; eowrum (of those who desert Beowulf in battle) cynne, 2886; gen.
sg. manna (gumena) cynnes, 702, etc.; maeran cynnes, 1730; laethan cynnes,
2009, 2355; usses cynnes Waegmundinga, 2814; gen. pl. cynna gehwylcum,
98.--Comp.: eormen-, feorh-, frum-, gum-, man-, wyrm-cyn.

cyn, st. n., _that which is suitable or proper_: gen. pl. cynna (of
etiquette) gemyndig, 614.

ge-cynde, adj., _innate, peculiar, natural_: nom. sg., 2198, 2697.

cyne-dom, st. m., _kingdom, royal dignity_: acc. sg., 2377.

cyning, st. m., _king_: nom. acc. sg. cyning, II, 864, 921, etc.; kyning,
620, 3173; dat. sg. cyninge, 3094; gen. sg. cyninges, 868, 1211; gen. pl.
kyning[a] wuldor, of God, 666.--Comp. beorn-, eoreth-, folc-, gueth-, heah-,
leod-, sae-, soeth-, þeod-, worold-, wuldor-cyning.

cyning-beald, adj., "_nobly bold_" (Thorpe), _excellently brave_ (?): nom.
pl. cyning-balde men, 1635.

ge-cyssan, w. v., _to kiss_: pret. gecyste þa cyning ... þegen betstan,
_kissed the best thane_ (Beowulf), 1871.

cyst (_choosing_, see ceosan), st. f., _the select, the best of a thing,
good quality, excellence_: nom. sg. irenna cyst, _of the swords_, 803,
1698; waepna cyst, 1560; symbla cyst, _choice banquet_, 1233; acc. sg. irena
cyst, 674; dat. pl. foldwegas ... cystum cuethe, _known through excellent
qualities_, 868; (cyning) cystum gecyethed, 924.--Comp. gum-, hilde-cyst.

cyeth. See on-cyeth.

cyethan (see cueth), w. v., _to make known, to manifest, to show_: imp. sg.
maegen-ellen cyeth, _show thy heroic strength_, 660; inf. cwealmbealu cyethan,
1941; ellen cyethan, 2696.

ge-cyethan (_to make known_, hence): 1) _to give information, to announce_:
inf. andsware gecyethan, _to give answer_, 354; gerund, to gecyethanne hwanan
eowre cyme syndon (_to show whence ye come_), 257; pret. part. soeth is
gecyethed þaet ... (_the truth has become known_, it has shown itself to be
true), 701; Higelace waes sieth Beowulfes snude gecyethed, _the arrival of B.
was quickly announced_, 1972; similarly, 2325.--2) _to make celebrated_, in
pret. part.: waes min faeder folcum gecyethed (_my father was known to
warriors_), 262; waes his modsefa manegum gecyethed, 349; cystum gecyethed, 924.

cyethethu (properly, _condition of being known_, hence _relationship_), st. f.,
_home, country, land_: in comp. feor-cyethethu. [should be cyeth, feor-cyeth--KTH]

ge-cypan, w. v., _to purchase_: inf. naes him aenig þearf þaet he ... þurfe
wyrsan wigfrecan weorethe gecypan, _had need to buy with treasures no
inferior warrior_, 2497.


D

daroeth, st. m., _spear_: dat. pl. dareethum lacan (_to fight_), 2849.

ge-dal, st. n., _parting, separation_: nom. sg. his worulde gedal, _his
separation from the world_ (his death), 3069.--Comp. ealdor-, lif-gedal.

daeg, st. m., _day_: nom. sg. daeg, 485, 732, 2647; acc. sg. daeg, 2400;
andlangne daeg, _the whole day_, 2116; morgenlongne daeg (_the whole
morning_), 2895; oeth domes daeg, _till judgment-day_, 3070; dat. sg. on þaem
daege þysses lifes (eo tempore, tunc), 197, 791, 807; gen. sg. daeges, 1601,
2321; hwil daeges, _a day's time, a whole day_, 1496; daeges and nihtes, _day
and night_, 2270; daeges, _by day_, 1936; dat. pl. on tyn dagum, _in ten
days_, 3161.--Comp. aer-, deaeth-, ende-, ealdor-, fyrn-, gear-, laen-, lif-,
swylt-, win-daeg, an-daeges.

daeg-hwil, st. f., _day-time_: acc. pl. þaet he daeghwila gedrogen haefde
eorethan wynne, _that he had enjoyed earth's pleasures during the days_
(appointed to him), i.e. that his life was finished, 2727.--(After Grein.)

daeg-rim, st. n., _series of days, fixed number of days_: nom. sg. dogera
daegrim (_number of the days of his life_), 824.

daed, st. f., _deed, action_: acc. sg. deorlice daed, 585; domleasan daed,
2891; frecne daede, 890; daed, 941; acc. pl. Grendles daeda, 195; gen. pl.
daeda, 181, 479, 2455, etc.; dat. pl. daedum, 1228, 2437, etc.--Comp. ellen-,
fyren-, lof-daed.

daed-cene, adj., _bold in deed_: nom. sg. daed-cene mon, 1646.

daed-fruma, w. m., _doer of deeds, doer_: nom. sg., of Grendel, 2091.

daed-bata, w. m., _he who pursues with his deeds_: nom. sg., of Grendel,
275.

daedla, w. m., _doer_: in comp. man-for-daedla.

dael, st. m., _part, portion_: acc. sg. dael, 622, 2246, 3128; acc. pl.
daelas, 1733.--Often dael designates the portion of a thing or of a quality
which belongs in general to an individual, as, oeth þaet him on innan
oferhygda dael weaxeeth, _till in his bosom his portion of arrogance
increases_: i.e. whatever arrogance he has, his arrogance, 1741. Biowulfe
weareth dryhtmaethma dael deaethe, forgolden, _to Beowulf his part of the splendid
treasures was paid with death_, i.e. whatever splendid treasures were
allotted to him, whatever part of them he could win in the fight with the
dragon, 2844; similarly, 1151, 1753, 2029, 2069, 3128.

daelan, w. v., _to divide, to bestow, to share with_, w. acc.: pres. sg.
III. madmas daeleeth, 1757; pres. subj. þaet he wieth aglaecean eofoetho daele, _that
he bestow his strength upon_ (strive with) _the bringer of misery_ the
drake), 2535; inf. hringas daelan, 1971; pret. beagas daelde, 80; sceattas
daelde, 1687.

be-daelan, w. instr., _(to divide), to tear away from, to strip of_: pret.
part. dreamum (dreame) bedaeled, _deprived of the heavenly joys_ (of
Grendel), 722, 1276.

ge-daelan: 1) _to distribute_: inf. (w. acc. _of the thing distributed_);
baer on innan eall gedaelan geongum and ealdum swylc him god sealde,
_distribute therein to young and old all that God had given him_, 71.--2)
_to divide, to separate_, with acc.: inf. sundur gedaelan lif wieth lice,
_separate life from the body_, 2423; so pret. subj. þaet he gedaelde ... anra
gehwylces lif wieth lice, 732.

denn (cf. denu, dene, vallis), st. n., _den, cave_: acc. sg. þaes wyrmes
denn, 2761; gen. sg. (draca) gewat dennes niosian, 3046.

ge-defe, adj.: 1) (impersonal) _proper, appropriate_: nom. sg. swa hit
gedefe waes (bieth), _as was appropriate, proper_, 561, 1671, 3176.--2) _good,
kind, friendly_; nom sg. beo þu suna minum daedum gedefe, _be friendly to my
son by deeds_ (support my son in deed, namely, when he shall have attained
to the government), 1228.--Comp. un-ge-defelice.

deman (see dom), w. v.: 1) _to judge, to award justly_: pres. subj. maeretho
deme, 688.--2) _to judge favorably, to praise, to glorify_: pret. pl. his
ellenweorc duguethum demdon, _praised his heroic deed with all their might_,
3176.

demend, _judge_: daeda demend (of God), 181.

deal, adj., "superbus, clarus, fretus" (Grimm): nom. pl. þryethum dealle,
494.

dead, adj., _dead_: nom. sg. 467, 1324, 2373; acc. sg. deadne, 1310.

deaeth, st. m., _death, dying_: nom. sg, deaeth, 441, 447, etc.; acc. sg. deaeth,
2169; dat. sg. deaethe, 1389, 1590, (as instr.) 2844, 3046; gen. sg. deaethes
wylm, 2270; deaethes nyd, 2455.--Comp. gueth-, wael-, wundor-deaeth.

deaeth-bed, st. n., _death-bed_: dat. sg. deaeth-bedde faest, 2902.

deaeth-cwalu, st. f., _violent death_, _ruin and death_: dat. pl. to
deaeth-cwalum, 1713.

deaeth-cwealm, st. m., _violent death, murder_: nom. sg. 1671.

deaeth-daeg, st. m., _death-day, dying day_: dat. sg. aefter deaeth-daege (_after
his death_), 187, 886.

deaeth-faege, adj., _given over to death_: nom. sg. (Grendel) deaeth-faege deog,
_had hidden himself, being given over to death_ (mortally wounded), 851.

deaeth-scua, w. m., _death-shadow, ghostly being, demon of death_: nom. sg.
deorc deaeth-scua (of Grendel), 160.

deaeth-werig, adj., _weakened by death_, i.e. dead: acc. sg. deaeth-werigne,
2126. See werig.

deaeth-wic, st. n. _death's house, home of death_: acc. sg. gewat deaethwic
seon (_had died_), 1276.

deagan (O.H.G. pret. part. tougan, _hidden_), _to conceal one's self, to
hide_: pret. (for pluperf.) deog, 851.--Leo.

deorc, adj., _dark_: of the night, nom. sg. (nihthelm) deorc, 1791; dat.
pl. deorcum nihtum, 275, 2212; of the terrible Grendel, nom. sg. deorc
deaeth-scua, 160.

deofol, st. m. n., _devil_: gen. sg. deofles, 2089; gen. pl. deofla, of
Grendel and his troop, 757, 1681.

deogol, dygol, adj., _concealed, hidden, inaccessible, beyond information,
unknown_: nom. sg. deogol daedhata (of Grendel), 275; acc. sg. dygel lond,
_inaccessible land_, 1358.

deop, st. n., _deep, abyss_: acc. sg., 2550.

deop, adv. _deeply_: acc. sg. deop waeter, 509, 1905.

diope, adj., _deep_: hit oeth domes daeg diope benemdon þeodnas maere, _the
illustrious rulers had charmed it deeply till the judgment-day, had laid a
solemn spell upon it_, 3070.

deor, st. n., _animal, wild animal_: in comp. mere-, sae-deor.

deor, adj.: 1) _wild, terrible_: nom. sg. dior daed-fruma (of Grendel),
2091.--2) _bold, brave_: nom. naenig ... deor, 1934.--Comp.: heaethu-,
hilde-deor.

deore, dyre, adj.: 1) _dear, costly_ (high in price): acc. sg. dyre iren,
2051; drincfaet dyre (deore), 2307, 2255; instr. sg. deoran sweorde, 561;
dat. sg. deorum maethme, 1529; nom. pl. dyre swyrd, 3049; acc. pl. deore
(dyre) maethmas, 2237, 3132.--2) _dear, beloved, worthy_: nom. sg. f., aeethelum
diore, _worthy by reason of origin_, 1950; dat. sg. aefter deorum men, 1880;
gen. sg. deorre duguethe, 488; superl. acc. sg. aldorþegn þone deorestan,
1310.

deor-lic, adj., _bold, brave_: acc. sg. deorlice daed, 585. See deor.

disc, st. m., _disc, plate, flat dish_: nom. acc. pl. discas, 2776, 3049.

ge-digan. See ge-dygan.

dol-gilp, st. m., _mad boast, foolish pride, vain-glory, thoughtless
audacity_: dat. sg. for dolgilpe, 509.

dol-lic, adj., _audacious_: gen. pl. maest ... daeda dollicra, 2647.

dol-sceaetha, w. m., _bold enemy_: acc. sg. þone dol-scaethan (Grendel), 479.

dogor, st. m. n., _day_; 1) day as a period of 24 hours: gen. sg. ymb antid
oethres dogores, _at the same time of the next day_, 219; morgen-leoht oethres
dogores, _the morning-light of the second day_, 606.--2) day in the usual
sense: acc. sg. n. þys dogor, _during this day_, 1396; instr. þy dogore,
1798; forman dogore, 2574; gen. pl. dogora gehwam, 88; dogra gehwylce,
1091; dogera daegrim, _the number of his days_ (the days of his life),
824.--3) _day_ in the wider sense of time: dat. pl. ufaran dogrum, _in
later days, times_, 2201, 2393.--Comp. ende-dogor.

dogor-gerim, st. n., _series of days_: gen. sg. waes eall sceacen
dogor-gerimes, _the whole number of his days_ (his life) _was past_, 2729.

dohtor, st. f., _daughter_: nom. acc. sg. dohtor, 375, 1077, 1930, 1982,
etc.

dom, st. m.: I., _condition, state in general_; in comp. cyne-,
wis-dom.--II., having reference to justice, hence: 1) _judgment, judicial
opinion_: instr. sg. weotena dome, _according to the judgment of the
Witan_, 1099. 2) _custom_: aefter dome, _according to custom_, 1721. 3)
_court, tribunal_: gen. sg. miclan domes, 979; oeth domes daeg, 3070, both
times of the last judgment.--III., _condition of freedom_ or _superiority_,
hence: 4) _choice, free will_: acc. sg. on sinne sylfes dom, _according to
his own choice_, 2148; instr. sg. selfes dome, 896, 2777. 5) _might,
power_: nom. sg. dom godes, 2859; acc. sg. Eofores anne dom, 2965; dat. sg.
drihtnes dome, 441. 6) _glory, honor, renown_: nom. sg. [dom], 955; dom
unlytel, _not a little glory_, 886; þaet waes forma sieth deorum maethme þaet his
dom alaeg, _it was the first time to the dear treasure_ (the sword Hrunting)
_that its fame was not made good_, 1529; acc. sg. ic me dom gewyrce, _make
renown for myself_, 1492; þaet þu ne alaete dom gedreosan, _that thou let not
honor fall_, 2667; dat. instr. sg. þaer he dome forleas, _here he lost his
reputation_, 1471; dome gewurethad, _adorned with glory_, 1646; gen. sg.
wyrce se þe mote domes, _let him make himself reputation, whoever is able_,
1389. 7) _splendor_ (in heaven): acc. soeth-faestra dom, _the glory of the
saints_, 2821.

dom-leas, adj., _without reputation, inglorious_: acc. sg. f. domleasan
daed, 2891.

don, red. v., _to do, to make, to treat_: 1) absolutely: imp. doeth swa ic
bidde, _do as I beg_, 1232.--2) w. acc.: inf. het hire selfre sunu on bael
don, 1117; pret. þa he him of dyde isernbyrnan, _took off the iron
corselet_, 672; (þonne) him Hunlafing, ... billa selest, on bearm dyde,
_when he made a present to him of Hunlafing, the best of swords_, 1145;
dyde him of healse hring gyldenne, _took off the gold ring from his neck_,
2810; ne him þaes wyrmes wig for wiht dyde, eafoeth and ellen, _nor did he
reckon as anything the drake's fighting, power, and strength_, 2349; pl. hi
on beorg dydon beg and siglu, _placed in the (grave-) mound rings and
ornaments_, 3165.--3) representing preceding verbs: inf. to Geatum sprec
mildum wordum! swa sceal man don, _as one should do_, 1173; similarly,
1535, 2167; pres. metod eallum weold, swa he nu git deeth, _the creator ruled
over all, as he still does_, 1059; similarly, 2471, 2860, and (sg. for pl.)
1135; pret. II. swa þu aer dydest, 1677; III. swa he nu gyt dyde, 957;
similarly, 1382, 1892, 2522; pl. swa hie oft aer dydon, 1239; similarly,
3071. With the case also which the preceding verb governs: wen' ic þaet he
wille ... Geatena leode etan unforhte, swa he oft dyde maegen Hreethmanna, _I
believe he will wish to devour the Geat people, the fearless, as he often
did_ (devoured) _the bloom of the Hreethmen_, 444; gif ic þaet gefricge ...
þaet þec ymbesittend egesan þywaeth, swa þec hetende hwilum dydon, _that the
neighbors distress thee as once the enemy did thee_ (i.e. distressed),
1829; gif ic owihte maeg þinre mod-lufan maran tilian þonne ic gyt dyde, _if
I can with anything obtain thy greater love than I have yet done_, 1825;
similarly, pl. þonne þa dydon, 44.

ge-don, _to do, to make_, with the acc. and predicate adj.: prs. (god)
gedeeth him swa gewealdene worolde daelas, _makes the parts of the world_
(i.e. the whole world) _so subject that ..._, 1733; inf. ne hyne on
medo-bence micles wyrethne drihten wereda gedon wolde, _nor would the leader
of the people much honor him at the mead-banquet_, 2187. With adv.: he mec
þaer on innan ... gedon wolde, _wished to place me in there_, 2091.

draca, w. m., _drake, dragon_: nom. sg., 893, 2212; acc. sg. dracan, 2403,
3132; gen. sg., 2089, 2291, 2550.--Comp.: eoreth-, fyr-, leg-, lig-,
nieth-draca.

on-draedan, st. v., w. acc. of the thing and dat. of the pers., _to fear, to
be afraid of_: inf. þaet þu him on-draedan ne þearft ... aldorbealu, _needest
not fear death for them_, 1675; pret. no he him þa saecce ondred, _was not
afraid of the combat_, 2348.

ge-draeg (from dragan, in the sense se gerere), st. n., _demeanor, actions_:
acc. sg. secan deofla gedraeg, 757.

drepan, st. v., _to hit, to strike_: pret. sg. sweorde drep ferheth-geniethlan,
2881; pret. part. bieth on hreethre ... drepen biteran straele, _struck in the
breast with piercing arrow_, 1746; waes in feorh dropen (_fatally hit_),
2982.

drepe, st. m., _blow, stroke_: acc. sg. drepe, 1590.

drefan, ge-drefan, w. v., _to move, to agitate, to stir up_: inf. gewat ...
drefan deop waeter (_to navigate_), 1905; pret. part. waeter under stod
dreorig and gedrefed, 1418.

dream, st. m., _rejoicing, joyous actions, joy_: nom. sg. haeleetha dream,
497; acc. sg. dream hludne, 88; þu ... dream healdende, _thou who livest in
rejoicing_ (at the drinking-carouse), _who art joyous_, 1228: dat. instr.
sg. dreame bedaeled, 1276; gen. pl. dreama leas, 851; dat. pl. dreamum (here
adverbial) lifdon, _lived in rejoicing, joyously_, 99; dreamum bedaeled,
722; the last may refer also to heavenly joys.--Comp. gleo-, gum-, man-,
sele-dream.

dream-leas, adj., _without rejoicing, joyless_: nom. sg. of King Heremod,
1721.

dreogan, st. v.: 1) _to lead a life, to be in a certain condition_: pret.
dreah aefter dome, _lived in honor, honorably_, 2180; pret. pl. fyren-þearfe
ongeat, þaet hie aer drugon aldorlease lange hwile, _(God) had seen the great
distress, (had seen) that they had lived long without a ruler_ (?), 15.--2)
_to experience, to live through, to do, to make, to enjoy_: imp. dreoh
symbelwynne, _pass through the pleasure of the meal, to enjoy the meal_,
1783; inf. driht-scype dreogan (_do a heroic deed_), 1471; pret. sundnytte
dreah (_had the occupation of swimming_, i.e. swam through the sea), 2361;
pret. pl. hie gewin drugon (_fought_), 799; hi sieth drugon, _made the way,
went_, 1967.--3) _to experience, to bear, to suffer_: scealt werhetho
dreogan, _shall suffer damnation_, 590; pret. þegn-sorge dreah, _bore
sorrow for his heroes_, 131; nearoþearfe dreah, 422; pret. pl. inwidsorge
þe hie aer drugon, 832; similarly, 1859.

a-dreogan, _to suffer, to endure_: inf. wraec adreogan, 3079.

ge-dreogan, _to live through, to enjoy_, pret. part. þaet he ... gedrogen
haefde eorethan wynne, _that he had now enjoyed the pleasures of earth_ (i.e.
that he was at his death), 2727.

dreor, st. m., _blood dropping or flowing from wounds_: instr. sg. dreore,
447.--Comp. heoru-, sawul-, wael-dreor.

dreor-fah, adj., _colored with blood, spotted with blood_: nom. sg. 485.

dreorig, adj., _bloody, bleeding_: nom. sg. waeter stod dreorig, 1418; acc.
sg. dryhten sinne driorigne fand, 2790.--Comp. heoru-dreorig.

ge-dreosan, st. v., _to fall down, to sink_: pres. sg. III. lic-homa laene
gedreoseeth, _the body, belonging to death, sinks down_, 1755; inf. þaet þu ne
alaete dom gedreosan, _honor fall, sink_, 2667.

drincan, st. v., _to drink_ (with and without the acc.): pres. part. nom.
pl. ealo drincende, 1946; pret. blod edrum dranc, _drank the blood in
streams_(?), 743; pret. pl. druncon win weras, _the men drank wine_, 1234;
þaer guman druncon, _where the men drank_, 1649. The pret. part., when it
stands absolutely, has an active sense: nom. pl. druncne dryhtguman, _ye
warriors who have drunk, are drinking_, 1232; acc. pl. nealles druncne slog
heoreth-geneatas, _slew not his hearth-companions who had drunk with him_,
i.e. at the banquet, 2180. With the instr. it means _drunken_: nom. sg.
beore (wine) druncen, 531, 1468; nom. pl. beore druncne, 480.

drifan, st. v., _to drive_: pres. pl. þa þe brentingas ofer floda genipu
feorran drifaeth, _who drive their ships thither from afar over the darkness
of the sea_, 2809; inf. (w. acc.) þeah þe he [ne] meahte on mere drifan
hringedstefnan, _although he could not drive the ship on the sea_, 1131.

to-drifan, _to drive apart, to disperse_: pret. oeth þaet unc flod todraf,
545.

drohtoeth, st. m., _mode of living_ or _acting, calling, employment_: nom.
sg. ne waes his drohtoeth þaer swylce he aer gemette, _there was no employment
for him_ (Grendel) _there such as he had found formerly_, 757.

drusian, w. v. (cf. dreosan, properly, _to be ready to fall_; here of
water), _to stagnate, to be putrid_. pret. lagu drusade (through the blood
of Grendel and his mother), 1631.

dryht, driht, st. f., _company, troop, band of warriors; noble band_: in
comp. mago-driht.

ge-dryht, ge-driht, st. f., _troop, band of noble warriors_: nom. sg. minra
eorla gedryht, 431; acc. sg. aeethelinga gedriht, 118; mid his eorla (haeleetha)
gedriht (gedryht), 357, 663; similarly, 634, 1673.--Comp. sibbe-gedriht.

dryht-bearn, st. n., _youth from a noble warrior band, noble young man_:
nom. sg. dryhtbearn Dena, 2036.

dryhten, drihten, st. m., _commander, lord_: a) _temporal lord_: nom. sg.
dryhten, 1485, 2001, etc.; drihten, 1051; dat. dryhtne, 2483, etc.;
dryhten, 1832.--b) _God_: nom. drihten, 108, etc.; dryhten, 687, etc.; dat.
sg. dryhtne, 1693, etc.; drihtne, 1399, etc.; gen. sg. dryhtnes, 441;
drihtnes, 941.--Comp.: frea-, freo-, gum-, man-, sige-, wine-dryhten.

dryht-guma, w. m., _one of a troop of warriors, noble warrior_: dat. sg.
drihtguman, 1389; nom. pl. drihtguman, 99; dryhtguman, 1232; dat. pl. ofer
dryhtgumum, 1791 (of Hroethgar's warriors).

dryht-lic, adj., _(that which befits a noble troop of warriors), noble,
excellent_: dryhtlic iren, _excellent sword_, 893; acc. sg. f. (with an
acc. sg. n.) drihtlice wif (of Hildeburh), 1159.

dryht-maethum, st. m., _excellent jewel, splendid treasure_: gen. pl.
dryhtmaethma, 2844.

dryht-scipe, st. m., _(lord-ship) warlike virtue, bravery; heroic deed_:
acc. sg. drihtscype dreogan, _to do a heroic deed_, 1471.

dryht-sele, st. m., _excellent, splendid hall_: nom. sg. driht-sele, 485;
dryhtsele, 768; acc. sg. dryhtsele, 2321.

dryht-sib, st. f., _peace_ or _friendship between troops of noble
warriors_: gen. sg. dryhtsibbe, 2069.

drync, st. m., _drink_: in comp. heoru-drync.

drync-faet, st. n., _vessel for drink, to receive the drink_: acc. sg.,
2255; drinc-faet, 2307.

drysmian, w. v., _to become obscure, gloomy_ (through the falling rain):
pres. sg. III. lyft drysmaeth, 1376.

drysne, adj. See on-drysne.

dugan, v., _to avail, to be capable, to be good_: pres. sg. III. huru se
aldor deah, _especially is the prince capable_, 369; ethonne his ellen deah,
_if his strength avails, is good_, 573; þe him selfa deah, _who is capable
of himself, who can rely on himself_, 1840; pres. subj. þeah þin wit duge,
_though, indeed, your understanding be good, avail_, 590; similarly, 1661,
2032; pret. sg. þu us wel dohtest, _you did us good, conducted yourself
well towards us_, 1822; similarly, nu seo hand ligeeth se þe eow welhwylcra
wilna dohte, _which was helpful to each one of your desires_, 1345; pret.
subj. þeah þu heaethoraesa gehwaer dohte, _though thou wast everywhere strong
in battle_, 526.

dugueth (_state of being fit, capable_), st. f.: 1) _capability, strength_:
dat. pl. for dugeethum, _in ability_(?), 2502; duguethum demdon, _praised with
all their might_(?), 3176.--2) _men capable of bearing arms, band of
warriors_, esp., _noble warriors_: nom. sg. dugueth unlytel, 498; dugueth,
1791, 2255; dat. sg. for duguethe, _before the heroes_, 2021; nalles fraetwe
geaf ealdor duguethe, _gave the band of heroes no treasure_ (more), 2921;
leoda duguethe on last, _upon the track of the heroes of the people_, i.e.
after them, 2946; gen. sg. cuethe he duguethe þeaw, _the custom of the noble
warriors_, 359; deorre duguethe, 488; similarly, 2239, 2659; acc. pl. duguetha,
2036.--3) contrasted with geogoeth, dugueth designates the noted warriors of
noble birth (as in the Middle Ages, knights in contrast with squires): so
gen. sg. duguethe and geogoethe, 160; gehwylc ... duguethe and iogoethe, 1675;
duguethe and geogoethe dael aeghwylcne, 622.

durran, v. pret. and pres. _to dare_; prs. sg. II. þu dearst bidan, _darest
to await_, 527; III. he gesecean dear, 685; pres. subj. sec gyf þu dyrre,
_seek_ (Grendel's mother), _if thou dare_, 1380; pret. dorste, 1463, 1469,
etc.; pl. dorston, 2849.

duru, st. f., _door, gate, wicket_: nom. sg., 722; acc. sg. [duru], 389.

ge-dufan, st. v., _to dip in, to sink into_: pret. þaet sweord gedeaf (_the
sword sank into the drake_, of a blow), 2701.

þurh-dufan, _to dive through; to swim through, diving_: pret. waeter up
þurh-deaf, _swam through the water upwards_ (because he was before at the
bottom), 1620.

dwellan, w. v., _to mislead, to hinder_: prs. III. no hine wiht dweleeth, adl
ne yldo, _him nothing misleads, neither sickness nor age_, 1736.

dyhtig, adj., _useful, good for_: nom. sg. n. sweord ... ecgum dyhtig,
1288.

dynnan, w. v., _to sound, to groan, to roar_: pret. dryhtsele (healwudu,
hruse) dynede, 768, 1318, 2559.

dyrne, adj.: 1) _concealed, secret, retired_: nom. sg. dyrne, 271; acc. sg.
dryhtsele dyrnne (of the drake's cave-hall), 2321.--2) _secret, malicious,
hidden by sorcery_: dat. instr. sg. dyrnan craefte, _with secret magic art_,
2291; dyrnum craefte, 2169; gen. pl. dyrnra gasta, _of malicious spirits_
(of Grendel's kin), 1358.--Comp. un-dyrne.

dyrne, adv., _in secret, secretly_: him ...aefter deorum men dyrne langaeth,
_longs in secret for the dear man_, 1880.

dyrstig, adj., _bold, daring_: þeah þe he daeda gehwaes dyrstig waere,
_although he had been courageous for every deed_, 2839.

ge-dygan, ge-digan, w. v., _to endure, to overcome_, with the acc. of the
thing endured: pres. sg. II. gif þu þaet ellenweorc aldre gedigest, _if thou
survivest the heroic work with thy life_, 662; III. þaet þone hilderaes hal
gedigeeth, _that he survives the battle in safety_, 300; similarly, inf.
unfaege gedigan wean and wraecsieth, 2293; hwaeether sel maege wunde gedygan,
_which of the two can stand the wounds better_ (come off with life), 2532;
ne meahte unbyrnende deop gedygan, _could not endure the deep without
burning_ (could not hold out in the deep), 2550; pret. sg. I. III.
ge-digde, 578, 1656, 2351, 2544.

dygol. See deogol.

dyre. See deore.


E

ecg, st. f., _edge of the sword, point_: nom. sg. sweordes ecg, 1107; ecg,
1525, etc.; acc. sg. wieth ord and wieth ecge ingang forstod, _defended the
entrance against point and edge_ (i.e. against spear and sword), 1550;
meces ecge, 1813; nom. pl. ecge, 1146.--_Sword, battle-axe, any cutting
weapon_: nom. sg. ne waes ecg bona (_not the sword killed him_), 2507; sio
ecg brun (Beowulf's sword Naegling), 2578; hyne ecg fornam, _the sword
snatched him away_, 2773, etc.; nom. pl. ecga, 2829; dat. pl. aescum and
ecgum, 1773; dat. pl. (but denoting only one sword) eacnum ecgum, 2141;
gen. pl. ecga, 483, 806, 1169;--_blade_: ecg waes iren, 1460.--Comp.: brun-,
heard-, styl-ecg, adj.

ecg-bana, w. m., _murderer by the sword_: dat. sg. Cain weareth to ecg-banan
angan breether, 1263.

ecg-hete, st. m., _sword-hate, enmity which the sword carries out_: nom.
sg., 84, 1739.

ecg-þracu, st. f., _sword-storm_ (of violent combat): acc. atole ecg-þraece,
597.

ed-hwyrft, st. m., _return_ (of a former condition): þa þaer sona weareth
edhwyrft eorlum, siethethan inne fealh Grendles modor (i.e. after Grendel's
mother had penetrated into the hall, the former perilous condition, of the
time of the visits of Grendel, returned to the men), 1282.

ed-wendan, w. v., _to turn back, to yield, to leave off_: inf. gyf him
edwendan aefre scolde bealuwa bisigu, _if for him the affliction of evil
should ever cease_, 280.

ed-wenden, st. f., _turning, change_: nom. sg. edwenden, 1775; ed-wenden
torna gehwylces (_reparation for former neglect_), 2189.

edwit-lif, st. n., _life in disgrace_: nom. sg., 2892.

efn, adj., _even, like_, with preceding on, and with depend. dat., _upon
the same level, near_: him on efn ligeeth ealdorgewinna, _lies near him_,
2904.

efnan (see aefnan) w. v., _to carry out, to perform, to accomplish_: pres.
subj. eorlscype efne (_accomplish knightly deeds_), 2536; inf. eorlscipe
efnan, 2623; sweorda gelac efnan (_to battle_), 1042; gerund. to efnanne,
1942; pret. eorlscipe efnde, 2134, 3008.

efne, adv., _even, exactly, precisely, just_, united with swa or swylc:
efne swa swiethe swa, _just so much as_, 1093; efne swa side swa, 1224; waes
se gryre laessa efne swa micle swa, _by so much the less as ..._, 1284;
leoht inne stod efne swa ... scineeth, _a gleam stood therein_ (in the sword)
_just as when ... shines_, 1572; efne swa hwylc maegetha swa þone magan cende
(_a woman who has borne such a son_), 944; efne swa hwylcum manna swa him
gemet þuhte, _to just such a man as seemed good to him_, 3058; efne swylce
maela swylce ... þearf gesaelde, _just at the times at which necessity
commanded it_, 1250.

eft, adv.: l) _thereupon, afterwards_: 56, 1147, 2112, 3047, etc.; eft sona
bieth, _then it happens immediately_, 1763; bot eft cuman, _help come again_,
281.--2) _again, on the other side_: þaet hine on ylde eft gewunigen
wilgesiethas, _that in old age again_ (also on their side) _willing
companions should be attached to him_, 22;--_anew, again_: 135, 604, 693,
1557, etc.; eft swa aer, _again as formerly_, 643.--3) retro, rursus,
_back_: 123, 296, 854, etc.; þaet hig aeethelinges eft ne wendon (_did not
believe that he would come back_), 1597.

eft-cyme, st. m., _return_: gen. sg. eftcymes, 2897.

eft-sieth, st. m., _journey back, return_: acc. sg. 1892; gen. sg. eft-siethes
georn, 2784; acc. pl. eftsiethas teah, _went the road back_, i.e. returned,
1333.

egesa, egsa (_state of terror_, active or passive): l) _frightfulness_:
acc. sg. þurh egsan, 276; gen. egesan ne gymeeth, _cares for nothing
terrible, is not troubled about future terrors_(?), 1758.--2) _terror,
horror, fear_: nom. sg. egesa, 785; instr. sg. egesan, 1828, 2737.--Comp.:
gled-, lig-, waeter-egesa.

eges-full, adj., _horrible (full of fear, fearful)_, 2930.

eges-lic, adj., _terrible, bringing terror_: of Grendel's head, 1650; of
the beginning of the fight with the drake, 2310; of the drake, 2826.

egle, adj., _causing aversion, hideous_: nom. pl. neut., or, more probably,
perhaps, adverbial, egle (MS. egl), 988.

egsian (denominative from egesa), w. v., _to have terror, distress_: pret.
(as pluperf.) egsode eorl(?), 6.

ehtian, w. v., _to esteem, to make prominent with praise_: III. pl. pres.
þaet þe ... weras ehtigaeth, _that thee men shall esteem, praise_, 1223.

elde (_those who generate_, cf. O.N. al-a, generare), st. m. only in the
pl., _men_: dat. pl. eldum, 2215; mid eldum, _among men_, 2612.--See ylde.

eldo, st. f., _age_: instr. sg. eldo gebunden, 2112.

el-land, st. n., _foreign land, exile_: acc. sg. sceall ... elland tredan,
(_shall be banished_), 3020.

ellen, st. n., _strength, heroic strength, bravery_: nom. sg. ellen, 573;
eafoeth and ellen, 903; Geata ... eafoeth and ellen, 603; acc. sg. eafoeth and
ellen, 2350; ellen cyethan, _show bravery_, 2696; ellen fremedon, _exercised
heroic strength, did heroic deeds_, 3; similarly, ic gefremman sceal eorlic
ellen, 638; ferh ellen wraec, _life drove out the strength_, i.e. with the
departing life (of the dragon) his strength left him, 2707; dat. sg. on
elne, 2507, 2817; as instr. þa waes aet þam geongum grim andswaru eethbegete
þam þe aer his elne forleas, _then it was easy for_ (every one of) _those
who before had lost his hero-courage, to obtain rough words from the young
man_ (Wiglaf), 2862; mid elne, 1494, 2536; elne, alone, in adverbial sense,
_strongly, zealously_, and with the nearly related meaning, _hurriedly,
transiently_, 894, 1098, 1968, 2677, 2918; gen. sg. elnes laet, 1530; þa him
waes elnes þearf, 2877.--Comp. maegen-ellen.

ellen-daed, st. f., _heroic deed_: dat. pl. -daedum, 877, 901.

ellen-gaest, st. m., _strength-spirit, demon with heroic strength_: nom. sg.
of Grendel, 86.

ellen-lice, adv., _strongly, with heroic strength_, 2123.

ellen-maerethu, st. f., _renown of heroic strength_, dat. pl. -maerethum, 829,
1472.

ellen-rof, adj., _renowned for strength_: nom. sg. 340, 358, 3064; dat. pl.
-rofum, 1788.

ellen-seoc, adj., _infirm in strength_: acc. sg. þeoden ellensiocne (_the
mortally wounded king, Beowulf_), 2788.

ellen-weorc, st. n., (_strength-work_), _heroic deed, achievement in
battle_: acc. sg. 662, 959, 1465, etc.; gen. pl. ellen-weorca, 2400.

elles, adv., _else, otherwise_: a (modal), _in another manner_, 2521.--b
(local), elles hwaer, _somewhere else_, 138; elles hwergen, 2591.

ellor, adv., _to some other place_, 55, 2255.

ellor-gast, -gaest, st. m., _spirit living elsewhere_ (standing outside of
the community of mankind): nom. sg. se ellorgast (Grendel), 808; (Grendel's
mother), 1622; ellorgaest (Grendel's mother), 1618; acc. pl. ellorgaestas,
1350.

ellor-sieth, st. m., _departure, death_: nom. sg. 2452.

elra, adj. (comparative of a not existing form, ele, Goth. aljis, alius),
_another_: dat. sg. on elran men, 753.

el-þeodig, adj., _of another people: foreign_: acc. pl. el-þeodige men,
336.

ende, st. m., _the extreme_: hence, 1) _end_: nom. sg. aldres (lifes) ende,
823, 2845; oeth þaet ende becwom (scil. unrihtes), 1255; acc. sg. ende
lifgesceafta (lifes, laen-daga), 3064, 1387, 2343; haefde eorethscrafa ende
genyttod, _had used the end of the earth-caves_ (had made use of the caves
for the last time), 3047; dat. sg. ealdres (lifes) aet ende, 2791, 2824;
eoletes aet ende, 224.--2) _boundary_: acc. sg. side rice þaet he his selfa
ne maeg ... ende geþencean, _the wide realm, so that he himself cannot
comprehend its boundaries_, 1735.--3) _summit, head_: dat. sg. eorlum on
ende, _to the nobles at the end_ (the highest courtiers), 2022.--Comp.
woruld-ende.

ende-daeg, st. m., _last day, day of death_: nom. sg. 3036; acc. sg. 638.

ende-dogor, st. m., _last day, day of death_: gen. sg. bega on wenum
endedogores and eftcymes leotes monnes (_hesitating between the belief in
the death and in the return of the dear man_), 2897.

ende-laf, st. f., _last remnant_: nom. sg. þu eart ende-laf usses cynnes,
_art the last of our race_, 2814.

ende-lean, st. n., _final reparation_: acc. sg. 1693.

ende-saeta, w. m., _he who sits on the border, boundary-guard_: nom. sg.
(here of the strand-watchman), 241.

ende-staef, st. m. (elementum finis), _end_: acc. sg. hit on endestaef eft
gelimpeeth, _then it draws near to the end_, 1754.

ge-endian, w. v., _to end_: pret. part. ge-endod, 2312.

enge, adj., _narrow_: acc. pl. enge anpaethas, _narrow paths_, 1411.

ent, st. m., _giant_: gen. pl. enta aer-geweorc (the sword-hilt out of the
dwelling-place of Grendel), 1680; enta geweorc (the dragon's cave), 2718;
eald-enta aer-geweorc (the costly things in the dragon's cave), 2775.

entisc, adj., _coming from giants_: acc. sg. entiscne helm, 2980.

etan, st. v., _to eat, to consume_: pres. sg. III. blodig wael ... eteeth
an-genga, _he that goes alone_ (Grendel) _will devour the bloody corpse_,
448; inf. Geatena leode ... etan, 444.

þurh-etan, _to eat through_: pret. part. pl. nom. swyrd ... þurhetone,
_swords eaten through_ (by rust), 3050.


E

ec. See eac.

ece, adj., _everlasting_; nom. ece drihten (God), 108; acc. sg. ece
eorethreced, _the everlasting earth-hall_ (the dragon's cave), 2720; geceas
ecne raed, _chose the everlasting gain_ (died), 1202; dat. sg. ecean
dryhtne, 1693, 1780, 2331; acc. pl. geceos ece raedas, 1761.

edre. See aedre.

eeth-begete, adj., _easy to obtain, ready_: nom. sg. þa waes aet þam geongum
grim andswaru eeth-begete, _then from the young man_ (Wiglaf) _it was an easy
thing to get a gruff answer_, 2862.

eethe. See eaethe.

eethel, st. m., _hereditary possessions, hereditary estate_: acc. sg. swaesne
eethel, 520; dat. sg. on eethle, 1731.--In royal families the hereditary
possession is the whole realm: hence, acc. sg. eethel Scyldinga, _of the
kingdom of the Scyldings_, 914; (Offa) wisdome heold eethel sinne, _ruled
with wisdom his inherited kingdom_, 1961.

eethel-riht, st. n., _hereditary privileges_ (rights that belong to a
hereditary estate): nom. sg. eard eethel-riht, _estate and inherited
privileges_, 2199.

eethel-stol, st. m., _hereditary seat, inherited throne_: acc. pl.
eethel-stolas, 2372.

eethel-turf, st. f., _inherited ground, hereditary estate_: dat. sg. on minre
eetheltyrf, 410.

eethel-weard, st. m., _lord of the hereditary estate_ (realm): nom. sg.
eethelweard (_king_), 1703, 2211; dat. sg. East-Dena eethel wearde (King
Hroethgar), 617.

eethel-wyn, st. f., _joy in_, or _enjoyment of, hereditary possessions_: nom.
sg. nu sceal ... eall eethelwyn eowrum cynne, lufen alicgean, _now shall your
race want all home-joy, and subsistence_(?) (your race shall be banished
from its hereditary abode), 2886; acc. sg. he me lond forgeaf, eard
eethelwyn, _presented me with land, abode, and the enjoyment of home_, 2494.

eeth-gesyne, yeth-gesene, adj., _easy to see, visible to all_: nom. sg. 1111,
1245.

efstan, w. v., _to be in haste, to hasten_: inf. uton nu efstan, _let us
hurry now_, 3102; pret. efste mid elne, _hastened with heroic strength_,
1494.

eg-clif, st. n., _sea-cliff_: acc. sg. ofer eg-clif (ecg-clif, MS.), 2894.

eg-stream, st. m., _sea-stream, sea-flood_: dat. pl. on eg-streamum, _in
the sea-floods_, 577. See eagor-stream.

ehtan (M.H.G. aechten; cf. aeht and ge-aehtla), w. v. w. gen., _to be a
pursuer, to pursue_: pres. part. aeglaeca ehtende waes duguethe and geogoethe,
159; pret. pl. ehton aglaecan, _they pursued the bringer of sorrow_
(Beowulf)(?), 1513.

est, st. m. f., _favor, grace, kindness_: acc. sg. he him est geteah meara
and maethma (_honored him with horses and jewels_), 2166; gearwor haefde
agendes est aer gesceawod, _would rather have seen the grace of the Lord_
(of God) _sooner_, 3076.--dat. pl., adverbial, libenter: him on folce
heold, estum mid are, 2379; estum geywan (_to present_), 2150; him waes ...
wunden gold estum geeawed (_presented_), 1195; we þaet ellenweorc estum
miclum fremedon, 959.

este, adj., _gracious_: w. gen. este bearn-gebyrdo, _gracious through the
birth_ (of such a son as Beowulf), 946.


EA

eafoeth, st. n., _power, strength_: nom, sg. eafoeth and ellen, 603, 903; acc.
sg. eafoeth and ellen, 2350; we frecne geneethdon eafoeth uncuethes, _we have
boldly ventured against the strength of the enemy_ (Grendel) _have
withstood him_, 961; gen. sg. eafoethes craeftig, 1467; þaet þec adl oethethe ecg
eafoethes getwaefed, _shall rob of strength_, 1764; acc. pl. eafeetho (MS.
earfeetho) [This reading cancelled. See note to l. 534--KTH], 534; dat. pl.
hine mihtig god ... eafeethum stepte, _made him great through strength_,
1718. See Note for l. 534.

eafor, st. m., _boar_; here the image of the boar as banner: acc. sg.
eafor, 2153.

eafora (_offspring_), w. m.: 1) _son_: nom. sg. eafera, 12, 898; eafora,
375; acc. sg. eaferan, 1548, 1848; gen. sg. eafera, 19; nom. pl. eaferan,
2476; dat. pl. eaferum, 1069, 2471; uncran eaferan, 1186.--2) in broader
sense, _successor_: dat. pl. eaforum, 1711.

eahta, num., _eight_: acc. pl. eahta mearas, 1036; eode eahta sum, _went as
one of eight, with seven others_, 3124.

eahtian, w. v.: 1) _to consider; to deliberate_: pret. pl. w. acc. raed
eahtedon, _consulted about help_, 172; pret. sg. (for the plural) þone
selestan þara þe mid Hroethgare ham eahtode, _the best one of those who with
Hroethgar deliberated about their home_ (ruled), 1408.--2) _to speak with
reflection of_ (along with the idea of praise): pret. pl. eahtodan
eorlscipe, _spoke of his noble character_, 3175.

eal, eall, adj., _all, whole_: nom. sg. werod eall, 652; pl. eal bencþelu,
486; sg. eall eethelwyn, 2886; eal worold, 1739, etc.; þaet hit weareth eal
gearo, healaerna maest, 77; þaet hit (wigbil) eal gemealt, 1609. And with a
following genitive: þaer waes eal geador Grendles grape, _there was all
together Grendel's hand, the whole hand of Grendel_, 836; eall ... lissa,
_all favor_, 2150; waes eall sceacen dogorgerimes, 2728. With apposition:
þuhte him eall to rum, wongas and wicstede, 2462; acc. sg. beot eal, 523;
similarly, 2018, 2081; oncyethethe ealle, _all distress_, 831; heals ealne,
2692; hlaew ... ealne utan-weardne, 2298; gif he þaet eal gemon, 1186, 2428;
þaet eall geondseh, recedes geatwa, 3089; ealne wide-ferheth, _through the
whole wide life, through all time_, 1223; instr. sg. ealle maegene, _with
all strength_, 2668; dat. sg. eallum ... manna cynne, 914; gen. sg. ealles
moncynnes, 1956. Subst. ic þaes ealles maeg ... gefean habban, 2740; bruc
ealles well, 2163; frean ealles þanc secge, _give thanks to the Lord of
all_, 2795; nom. pl. untydras ealle, 111; sceotend ... ealle, 706; we
ealle, 942; acc. pl. feond ealle, 700; similarly, 1081, 1797, 2815; subst.
ofer ealle, 650; ealle hie deaeth fornam, 2237; lig ealle forswealg þara þe
þaer gueth fornam, _all of those whom the war had snatched away_, 1123; dat.
pl. eallum ceaster-buendum, 768; similarly, 824, 907, 1418; subst. ana wieth
eallum, _one against all_, 145; with gen. eallum gumena cynnes, 1058; gen.
pl. aeethelinga bearn ealra twelfa, _the kinsmen of all twelve nobles_ (twelve
nobles hold the highest positions of the court), 3172; subst. he ah ealra
geweald, _has power over all_, 1728.

Uninflected: bil eal þurhwod flaeschoman, _the battle-axe cleft the body
through and through_, 1568; haefde ... eal gefeormod fet and folma, _had
devoured entirely feet and hands_, 745; se þe eall geman gar-cwealm gumena,
_who remembers thoroughly the death of the men by the spear_, 2043, etc.

Adverbial: þeah ic eal maege, _although I am entirely able_, 681; hi on
beorg dydon beg and siglu eall swylce hyrsta, _they placed in the
grave-mound rings, and ornaments, all such adornments_, 3165.--The gen. sg.
ealles, adverbial in the sense of _entirely_, 1001, 1130.

eald, adj., _old_: a) of the age of living beings: nom. sg. eald, 357,
1703, 2211, etc.; dat. sg. ealdum, 2973; gen. sg. ealdes uhtflogan
(_dragon_), 2761; dat. sg. ealdum, 1875; geongum and ealdum, 72.--b) of
things and of institutions: nom. sg. helm monig eald and omig, 2764; acc.
sg. ealde lafe (_sword_), 796, 1489; ealde wisan, 1866; eald sweord, 1559,
1664, etc.; eald gewin, _old_ (lasting years), _distress_, 1782; eald enta
geweorc (_the precious things in the drake's cave_), 2775; acc. pl. ealde
maethmas, 472; ofer ealde riht, _against the old laws_ (namely, the Ten
Commandments; Beowulf believes that God has sent him the drake as a
punishment, because he has unconsciously, at some time, violated one of the
commandments), 2331.

yldra, compar. _older_: min yldra maeg, 468; yldra broethor, 1325; oeth þaet he
(Heardred) yldra weareth, 2379.

yldesta, superl. _oldest_, in the usual sense; dat. sg. þam yldestan, 2436;
in a moral sense, _the most respected_: nom. sg. se yldesta, 258; acc. sg.
þone yldestan, 363, both times of Beowulf.

eald-faeder, st. m., _old-father, grandfather, ancestor_: nom. sg. 373.

eald-gesegen, st. f., _traditions from old times_: gen. pl. eal-fela
eald-gesegena, _very many of the old traditions_, 870.

eald-gesieth, st. m., _companion ever since old times, courtier for many
years_: nom. pl. eald-gesiethas, 854.

eald-gestreon, st. n., _treasure out of the old times_: dat. pl.
eald-gestreonum, 1382; gen. pl. -gestreona, 1459.

eald-gewinna, w. m., _old-enemy, enemy for many years_: nom. sg. of
Grendel, 1777.

eald-gewyrht, st. n., _merit on account of services rendered during many
years_: nom. pl. þaet naeron eald-gewyrht, þaet he ana scyle gnorn þrowian,
_that has not been his desert ever since long ago, that he should bear the
distress alone_, 2658.

eald-hlaford, st. m., _lord through many years_: gen. sg. bill
eald-hlafordes (of the old Beowulf(?)), 2779.

eald-metod, st. m., _God ruling ever since ancient times_: nom. sg. 946.

ealdor, aldor, st. m., _lord, chief_ (king or powerful noble): nom. sg.
ealdor, 1645, 1849, 2921; aldor, 56, 369, 392; acc. sg. aldor, 669; dat.
sg. ealdre, 593; aldre, 346.

ealdor, aldor, st. n., _life_: acc. sg. aldor, 1372; dat. sg. aldre, 1448,
1525; ealdre, 2600; him on aldre stod herestrael hearda (in vitalibus),
1435; nalles for ealdre mearn, _was not troubled about his life_, 1443; of
ealdre gewat, _went out of life, died_, 2625; as instr. aldre, 662, 681,
etc.; ealdre, 1656, 2134, etc.; gen. sg. aldres, 823; ealdres, 2791, 2444;
aldres orwena, _despairing of life_, 1003, 1566; ealdres scyldig, _having
forfeited life_, 1339, 2062; dat. pl. aldrum neethdon, 510, 538.--Phrases: on
aldre (_in life_), _ever_, 1780; to aldre (_for life_), _always_, 2006,
2499; awa to aldre, _for ever and ever_, 956.

ealdor-bealu, st. n., _life's evil_: acc. sg. þu ... ondraedan ne þearft ...
aldorbealu eorlum, _thou needest not fear death for the courtiers_, 1677.

ealdor-cearu, st. f., _trouble that endangers life, great trouble_: dat.
sg. he his leodum weareth ... to aldor-ceare, 907.

ealdor-dagas, st. m. pl., _days of one's life_: dat. pl. naefre on
aldor-dagum (_never in his life_), 719; on ealder-dagum aer (_in former
days_), 758.

ealdor-gedal, st. n., _severing of life, death, end_: nom. sg. aldor-gedal,
806.

ealdor-gewinna, w. m., _life-enemy, one who strives to take his enemy's
life_ (in N.H.G. the contrary conception, Tod-feind): nom. sg.
ealdorgewinna (_the dragon_), 2904.

ealdor-leas, adj., _without a ruler_(?): nom. pl. aldor-lease, 15.

ealdor-leas, adj., _lifeless, dead_: acc. sg. aldor-leasne, 1588;
ealdor-leasne, 3004.

ealdor-þegn, st. m., _nobleman at the court, distinguished courtier_: acc.
sg. aldor-þegn (Hroethgar's confidential adviser, Aeschere), 1309.

eal-fela, adj., _very much_: with following gen., eal-fela eald-gesegena,
_very many old traditions_, 870; eal-fela eotena cynnes, 884.

ealgian, w. v., _to shield, to defend, to protect_: inf. w. acc. feorh
ealgian, 797, 2656, 2669; pret. siethethan he (Hygelac) under segne sinc
eal-gode, waelreaf werede, _while under his banner he protected the
treasures, defended the spoil of battle_ (i.e. while he was upon the Viking
expeditions), 1205.

eal-gylden, adj., _all golden, entirely of gold_: nom. sg. swyn ealgylden,
1112; acc. sg. segn eallgylden, 2768.

eal-irenne, adj., _entirely of iron_: acc. sg. eall-irenne wigbord, _a
wholly iron battle-shield_, 2339.

ealu, st. n., _ale, beer_: acc. sg. ealo drincende, 1946.

ealu-benc, st. f., _ale-bench, bench for those drinking ale_: dat. sg. in
ealo-bence, 1030; on ealu-bence, 2868.

ealu-scerwen, st. f., _terror_, under the figure of a mishap at an
ale-drinking, probably the sudden taking away of the ale: nom. sg. Denum
eallum weareth ... ealuscerwen, 770.

ealu-waege, st. n., _ale-can, portable vessel out of which ale is poured
into the cups_: acc. sg. 2022; hroden ealowaege, 495; dat. sg. ofer ealowaege
(_at the ale-carouse_), 481.

eal-wealda, w. adj., _all ruling_ (God): nom. sg. faeder alwalda, 316;
alwalda, 956, 1315; dat. sg. al-wealdan, 929.

eard, st. m., _cultivated ground, estate, hereditary estate_; in a broader
sense, _ground in general, abode, place of sojourn_: nom. sg. him waes bam
... lond gecynde, eard eethel-riht, _the land was bequeathed to them both,
the land and the privileges attached to it._ 2199; acc. sg. fifel-cynnes
eard, _the ground of the giant race, place of sojourn_, 104; similarly,
aelwihta eard, 1501; eard gemunde, _thought of his native ground, his home_,
1130; eard git ne const, _thou knowest not yet the place of sojourn._ 1378;
eard and eorlscipe, _praedium et nobilitatem_, 1728; eard eethelwyn, _land and
the enjoyment of home_, 2494; dat. sg. ellor hwearf of earde, _went
elsewhere from his place of abode_, i.e. died, 56; þaet we rondas beren eft
to earde, _that we go again to our homes_, 2655; on earde, 2737; nom. pl.
eacne eardas, _the broad expanses_ (in the fen-sea where Grendel's home
was), 1622.

eardian, w. v.: 1) _to have a dwelling-place, to live; to rest_: pret. pl.
dyre swyrd swa hie wieth eorethan faeethm þaer eardodon, _costly swords, as they
had rested in the earth's bosom_, 3051.--2) also transitively, _to
inhabit_: pret. sg. Heorot eardode, 166; inf. wic eardian elles hwergen,
_inhabit a place elsewhere_ (i.e. die), 2590.

eard-lufa, w. m., _the living upon one's land, home-life_: acc. sg.
eard-lufan, 693.

earfoeth-lice, adv., _with trouble, with difficulty_, 1637, 1658; _with
vexation, angrily_, 86; _sorrowfully_, 2823; _with difficulty, scarcely_,
2304, 2935.

earfoeth-þrag, st. f., _time full of troubles, sorrowful time_: acc. sg.
-þrage, 283.

earh, adj., _cowardly_: gen. sg. ne bieth swylc earges sieth (_no coward
undertaken that_), 2542.

earm, st. m., _arm_: acc. sg. earm, 836, 973; wieth earm gesaet, _supported
himself with his arm_, 750; dat. pl. earmum, 513.

earm, adj., _poor, miserable, unhappy_: nom. sg. earm, 2369; earme ides,
_the unhappy woman_, 1118; dat. sg. earmre teohhe, _the unhappy band_,
2939.--Comp. acc. sg. earmran mannan, _a more wretched, more forsaken man_,
577.

earm-beag, st. m., _arm-ring, bracelet_: gen. pl. earm-beaga fela searwum
gesaeled, _many arm-rings interlaced_, 2764.

earm-hread, st. f., _arm-ornament_. nom. pl. earm-hreade twa, 1195 (Grein's
conjecture, MS. earm reade).

earm-lic, adj., _wretched, miserable_: nom. sg. sceolde his ealdor-gedal
earmlic wurethan, _his end should be wretched_, 808.

earm-sceapen, pret. part. as adj. (_properly, wretched by the decree of
fate_), _wretched_: nom. sg. 1352.

earn, st. m., _eagle_: dat. sg. earne, 3027.

eatol. See atol.

eaxl, st. f., _shoulder_: acc. sg. eaxle, 836, 973; dat. sg. on eaxle, 817,
1548; be eaxle, 1538; on eaxle ides gnornode, _the woman sobbed on the
shoulder_ (of her son, who has fallen and is being burnt), 1118; dat. pl.
saet frean eaxlum neah, _sat near the shoulders of his lord_ (Beowulf lies
lifeless upon the earth, and Wiglaf sits by his side, near his shoulder, so
as to sprinkle the face of his dead lord), 2854; he for eaxlum gestod
Deniga frean, _he stood before the shoulders of the lord of the Danes_
(i.e. not directly before him, but somewhat to the side, as etiquette
demanded), 358.

eaxl-gestealla, w. m., _he who has his position at the shoulder_ (sc. of
his lord), _trusty courtier, counsellor of a prince_: nom. sg. 1327; acc.
pl. -gesteallan, 1715.


EA

eac, conj., _also_: 97, 388, 433, etc.; ec, 3132.

eacen (pret. part. of a not existing eacan, augere), adj., _wide-spread_,
_large_: nom. pl. eacne eardas, _broad plains_, 1622.--_great, heavy_: eald
sweord eacen, 1664; dat. pl. eacnum ecgum, 2141, both times of the great
sword in Grendel's habitation.--_great, mighty, powerful_: aeethele and eacen,
of Beowulf, 198.

eacen-craeftig, adj., _immense_ (of riches), _enormously great_: acc. sg.
hord-aerna sum eacen-craeftig, _that enormous treasure-house_, 2281; nom. sg.
þaet yrfe eacen-craeftig, iumonna gold, 3052.

eadig, adj., _blessed with possessions, rich, happy by reason of property_:
nom. sg. wes, þenden þu lifige, aeetheling eadig, _be, as long as thou livest,
a prince blessed with riches_, 1226; eadig mon, 2471.--Comp. sige-, sigor-,
tir-eadig.

eadig-lice, adv., _in abundance, in joyous plenty_: dreamum lifdon
eadiglice, _lived in rejoicing and plenty_, 100.

eaethe, eethe, yethe, adj., _easy, pleasant_: nom. pl. gode þancedon þaes þe him
yeth-lade eaethe wurdon, _thanked God that the sea-ways_ (the navigation) _had
become easy to them_, 228; ne waes þaet eethe sieth, _no pleasant way_, 2587; naes
þaet yethe ceap, _no easy purchase_, 2416; no þaet yethe byeth to befleonne, _not
easy_ (as milder expression for _in no way, not at all_), 1003.

eaethe, yethe, adv., _easily_. eaethe, 478, 2292, 2765.

eaeth-fynde, adj., _easy to find_: nom. sg. 138.

eage, w. n., _eye_: dat. pl. him of eagum stod leoht unfaeger, _out of his
eyes came a terrible gleam_, 727; þaet ic ... eagum starige, _see with eyes,
behold_, 1782; similarly, 1936; gen. pl. eagena bearhtm, 1767.

eagor-stream, st. m., _sea-stream sea_: acc. sg. 513.

ea-land, st. n., _land surrounded by water_ (of the land of the Geatas):
acc. sg. ea-lond, 2335; _island_.

eam, st. m., _uncle, mothers brother_: nom. sg. 882.

eastan, adv., _from the east_, 569.

eawan, w. v., _to disclose, to show, to prove_: pres. sg. III. eaweeth ...
uncuethne nieth, _shows evil enmity_, 276. See eowan, ywan.

ge-eawan, _to show, to offer_: pret. part. him waes ... wunden gold estum
ge-eawed, _was graciously presented_, 1195.


EO

eode. See gangan.

eodor, st. m., _fence, hedge, railing_. Among the old Germans, an estate
was separated by a fence from the property of others. Inside of this fence
the laws of peace and protection held good, as well as in the house itself.
Hence eodor is sometimes used instead of _house_: acc. pl. heht eahta
mearas on flet teon, in under eoderas, _gave orders to lead eight steeds
into the hall, into the house_, 1038.--2) figuratively, _lord, prince_, as
protector: nom. sg. eodor, 428, 1045; eodur, 664.

eofoeth, st. n., _strength_: acc. pl. eofoetho, 2535. See eafoeth.

eofer, st. m.: 1) _boar_, here of the metal boar-image upon the helmet:
nom. sg. eofer irenheard, 1113.--2) figuratively, _bold hero, brave
fighter_ (O.N. ioefur): nom. pl. þonne ... eoferas cnysedan, _when the
heroes rushed upon each other_, 1329, where eoferas and feethan stand in the
same relation to each other as cnysedan and hniton.

eofor-lic, st. n. _boar-image_ (on the helmet): nom. pl. eofor-lic scionon,
303.

eofor-spreot, st. m., _boar-spear_: dat. pl. mid eofer-spreotum
heoro-hocyhtum, _with hunting-spears which were provided with sharp hooks_,
1438.

eogueth, iogueth. See geogoeth.

eolet, st. m. n., _sea_(?): gen. sg. eoletes, 224.

eorclan-stan, st. m., _precious stone_: acc. pl. -stanas, 1209.

eoreth-cyning, st. m., _king of the land_: gen. sg. eoreth-cyninges (Finn),
1156.

eoreth-draca, w. m., _earth-drake, dragon that lives in the earth_: nom. sg.
2713, 2826.

eorethe, w. f.: 1) _earth_ (in contrast with heaven), _world_: acc. sg.
aelmihtiga eorethan worhte, 92; wide geond eorethan, _far over the earth,
through the wide world_, 266; dat. sg. ofer eorethan, 248, 803; on eorethan,
1823, 2856, 3139; gen. sg. eorethan, 753.--2) _earth, ground_: acc. sg. he
eorethan gefeoll, _fell to the ground_, 2835; forleton eorla gestreon eorethan
healdan, _let the earth hold the nobles' treasure_, 3168; dat. sg. þaet hit
on eorethan laeg, 1533; under eorethan, 2416; gen. sg. wieth eorethan faeethm (_in the
bosom of the earth_), 3050.

eoreth-reced, st. n., _hall in the earth, rock-hall_: acc. sg. 2720.

eoreth-scraef, st. n., _earth-cavern, cave_: dat. sg. eoreth-[scraefe], 2233;
gen. pl. eoreth-scraefe, 3047.

eoreth-sele, st. m., _hall in the earth, cave_: acc. sg. eoreth-sele, 2411; dat
sg. of eorethsele, 2516.

eoreth-weall, st. m., _earth-wall_: acc. sg. (Ongenþeow) beah eft under
eorethweall, _fled again under the earth-wall_ (into his fortified camp),
2958; þa me waes ... sieth alyfed inn under eorethweall, _then the way in, under
the earth-wall was opened to me_ (into the dragon's cave), 3091.

eoreth-weard, st. m., _land-property, estate_: acc. sg. 2335.

eorl, st. m., _noble born man, a man of the high nobility_: nom. sg. 762,
796, 1229, etc.; acc. sg. eorl, 573, 628, 2696; gen. sg. eorles, 690, 983,
1758, etc.; acc. pl. eorlas, 2817; dat. pl. eorlum, 770, 1282, 1650, etc.;
gen. pl. eorla, 248, 357, 369, etc.--Since the king himself is from the
stock of the eorlas, he is also called eorl, 6, 2952.

eorl-gestreon, st. n., _wealth of the nobles_: gen. pl. eorl-gestreona ...
hardfyrdne dael, 2245.

eorl-gewaede, st. n., _knightly dress, armor_: dat. pl. -gewaedum, 1443.

eorlic (i.e. eorl-lic), adj., _what it becomes a noble born man to do,
chivalrous_: acc. sg. eorlic ellen, 638.

eorl-scipe, st. m., _condition of being noble born, chivalrous nature,
nobility_: acc. sg. eorl-scipe, 1728, 3175; eorl-scipe efnan, _to do
chivalrous deeds_, 2134, 2536, 2623, 3008.

eorl-weorod, st. n., _followers of nobles_: nom. sg. 2894.

eormen-cyn, st. n., _very extensive race, mankind_: gen. sg. eormen-cynnes,
1958.

eormen-grund, st. m., _immensely wide plains, the whole broad earth_: acc.
sg. ofer eormen-grund, 860.

eormen-laf, st. f., _enormous legacy_: acc. sg. eormen-lafe aeethelan cynnes
(_the treasures of the dragon's cave_) 2235.

eorre, adj., _angry, enraged_: gen. sg. eorres, 1448.

eoton, st. m.: 1) _giant_: nom. sg. eoten (Grendel), 762; dat. sg.
uninflected, eoton (Grendel), 669; nom. pl. eotenas, 112.--2) Eotens,
subjects of Finn, the N. Frisians: 1073, 1089, 1142; dat. pl. 1146. See
List of Names, p. 114.

eotonisc, adj., _gigantic, coming from giants_: acc. sg. eald sweord
eotenisc (eotonisc), 1559, 2980, (etonisc, MS.) 2617.


EO

eored-geatwe, st. f. pl., _warlike adornments_: acc. pl., 2867.

eowan, w. v., _to show, to be seen_: pres. sg. III. ne gesacu ohwaer,
ecghete eoweeth, _nowhere shows itself strife, sword-hate_, 1739. See eawan,
ywan.

eower: 1) gen. pl. pers. pron., vestrum: eower sum, _that one of you_
(namely, Beowulf), 248; faehethe eower leode, _the enmity of the people of
you_ (of your people), 597; nis þaet eower sieth ... nefne min anes, 2533.--2)
poss. pron., _your_, 251, 257, 294, etc.


F

ge-fandian, -fondian, w. v., _to try, to search for, to find out, to
experience_: w. gen. pret. part. þaet haefde gumena sum goldes gefandod,
_that a man had discovered the gold_, 2302; þonne se an hafaeth þurh deaethes
nyd daeda gefondad, _now the one_ (Herebeald) _has with death's pang
experienced the deeds_ (the unhappy bow-shot of Haeethcyn), 2455.

fara, w. m., _farer, traveller_: in comp. mere-fara.

faran, st. v., _to move from one place to another, to go, to wander_: inf.
to ham faran, _to go home_, 124; leton on geflit faran fealwe mearas, _let
the fallow horses go in emulation_, 865; cwom faran flotherge on Fresna
land, _had come to Friesland with a fleet_, 2916; com leoda dugoethe on last
faran, _came to go upon the track of the heroes of his people_, i.e. to
follow them, 2946; gerund waeron aeethelingas eft to leodum fuse to farenne,
_the nobles were ready to go again to their people_, 1806; pret. sg. gegnum
for [þa] ofer myrcan mor, _there had_ (Grendel's mother) _gone away over
the dark fen_, 1405; saegenga for, _the seafarer_ (the ship) _drove along_,
1909; (wyrm) mid baele for, (the dragon) _fled away with fire_, 2309; pret.
pl. þaet ... scawan scirhame to scipe foron, _that the visitors in
glittering attire betook themselves to the ship_, 1896.

gefaran, _to proceed, to act_: inf. hu se mansceaetha under faergripum gefaran
wolde, _how he would act in his sudden attacks_, 739.

ut faran, _to go out_: w. acc. let of breostum ... word ut faran, _let
words go out of his breast, uttered words_, 2552.

faroeth, st. m., _stream, flood of the sea_: dat. sg. to brimes faroethe, 28;
aefter faroethe, _with the stream_, 580; aet faroethe, 1917.

faru, st. f., _way, passage, expedition_: in comp. ad-faru.

facen-staef (elementum nequitiae), st. m., _wickedness, treachery, deceit_.
acc. pl. facen-stafas, 1019.

fah, fag, adj., _many-colored, variegated, of varying color_ (especially
said of the color of gold, of bronze, and of blood, in which the beams of
light are refracted): nom. sg. fah (_covered with blood_), 420; blode fah,
935; atertanum fah (sc. iren) [This is the MS reading; emmended to
atertearum in text--KTH], 1460; sadol searwum fah (_saddle artistically
ornamented with gold_), 1039; sweord swate fah, 1287; brim blode fah, 1595;
waeldreore fag, 1632; (draca) fyrwylmum fah (_because he spewed flame_),
2672; sweord fah and faeted, 2702; blode fah, 2975; acc. sg. dreore fahne,
447; goldsele faettum fahne, 717; on fagne flor treddode, _trod the shining
floor_ (of Heorot), 726; hrof golde fahne, _the roof shining with gold_,
928; nom. pl. eoforlic ... fah and fyr-beard, 305; acc. pl. þa hilt since
fage, 1616; dat. pl. fagum sweordum, 586.--Comp. ban-, blod-, brun-,
dreor-, gold-, gryre-, searo-, sinc-, stan-, swat-, wael-, wyrm-fah.

fah, fag, fa, adj.: 1) _hostile_: nom. sg. fah feond-scaetha, 554; he waes fag
wieth god (Grendel), 812; acc. sg. fane (_the dragon_), 2656; gen. pl. fara,
578, 1464.--2) _liable to pursuit, without peace, outlawed_: nom. sg. fag,
1264; mane fah, _outlawed through crime_, 979; fyren-daedum fag,
1002.--Comp. nearo-fah.

famig-heals, adj., _with foaming neck_: nom. sg. flota famig-heals, 218;
(saegenga) famig-heals, 1910.

faec, st. n., _period of time_: acc. sg. lytel faec, _during a short time_,
2241.

faeder, st. m., _father_: nom. sg. faeder, 55, 262, 459, 2609; of God, 1610;
faeder alwalda, 316; acc. sg. faeder, 1356; dat. sg. faeder, 2430; gen. sg.
faeder, 21, 1480; of God, 188--Comp.: aer, eald-faeder.

faedera, w. m., _father's brother_ in comp. suhter-gefaederan.

faeder-aeethelo, st. n. pl., _paternus principatus_ (?): dat. pl. faeder-aeethelum,
912.

faederen-maeg, st. m., _kinsman descended from the same father,
co-descendant_: dat. sg. faederen-maege, 1264.

faeethm, st. m.: 1) _the outspread, encircling arms_: instr. pl. feondes
faeeth[mum], 2129.--2) _embrace, encircling_: nom. sg. liges faeethm, 782; acc.
sg. in fyres faeethm, 185.--3) _bosom, lap_: acc. sg. on foldan faeethm, 1394;
wieth eorethan faeethm, 3050; dat. pl. to faeder (God's) faeethmum, 188.--4) _power,
property_: acc. in Francna faeethm, 1211.--Cf. sid-faeethmed, sieth-faeethme.

faeethmian, w. v., _to embrace, to take up into itself_: pres. subj. þaet minne
lichaman ... gled faeethmie, 2653; inf. leton flod faeethmian fraetwa hyrde, 3134.

ge-faeg, adj., _agreeable, desirable_ (Old Eng., fawe, _willingly_): comp.
ge-faegra, 916.

faegen, adj., _glad, joyous_: nom. pl. ferhethum faegne, _the glad at heart_,
1634.

faeger, adj., _beautiful, lovely_: nom. sg. faeger fold-bold, 774; faeger
foldan bearm, 1138; acc. sg. freoethoburh faegere, 522; nom. pl. þaer him
fold-wegas faegere þuhton, 867.--Comp. un-faeger.

faegere, faegre, adv., _beautifully, well, becomingly, according to
etiquette_: faegere geþaegon medoful manig, 1015; þa waes flet-sittendum
faegere gereorded, _becomingly the repast was served_, 1789; Higelac ongan
... faegre fricgean, 1986; similarly, 2990.

faer, st. n., _craft, ship_: nom. sg., 33.

faest, adj., _bound, fast_: nom. sg. bieth se slaep to faest, 1743; acc. sg.
freondscipe faestne, 2070; faeste frioethuwaere, 1097.--The prep. on stands to
denote the where or wherein: waes to faest on þam (sc. on faehethe and fyrene),
137; on ancre faest, 303. Or, oftener, the dative: feond-grapum faest,
_(held) fast in his antagonist's clutch_, 637; fyrbendum faest, _fast in the
forged hinges_, 723; handa faest, 1291, etc.; hygebendum faest (beorn him
langaeth), _fast (shut) in the bonds of his bosom, the man longs for_ (i.e.
in secret), 1879.--Comp: ar-, blaed-, gin-, soeth-, tir-, wis-faest.

faeste, adv., _faest_ 554, 761, 774, 789, 1296.--Comp. faestor, 143.

be-faestan, w. v., _to give over_: inf. het Hildeburh hire selfre sunu
sweoloethe befaestan, _to give over to the flames her own son_, 1116.

faesten, st. n., _fortified place, or place difficult of access_: acc. sg.
leoda faesten, _the fastness of the Geatas_ (with ref. to 2327), 2334;
faesten (Ongenþeow's castle or fort), 2951; faesten (Grendel's house in the
fen-sea), 104.

faest-raed, adj., _firmly resolved_: acc. sg. faest-raedne geþoht, _firm
determination_, 611.

faet, st. m., _way, journey_: in comp. sieth-faet.

faet, st. n., _vessel; vase, cup_: acc. pl. fyrn-manna fatu, _the
(drinking-) vessels of men of old times_, 2762.--Comp.: ban-, drync-,
maethethum-, sinc-, wundor-faet.

faet, st. n. (?), _plate, sheet of metal_, especially _gold plate_ (Dietrich
Hpt. Ztschr. XI. 420): dat. pl. gold sele ... faettum fahne, _shining with
gold plates_ (the walls and the inner part of the roof were partly covered
with gold), 717; sceal se hearda helm hyrsted golde faetum befeallen (sc.
wesan), _the gold ornaments shall fall away from it_, 2257.

faeted, faett, part., _ornamented with gold beaten into plate-form_: gen. sg.
faettan goldes, 1094, 2247; instr. sg. faettan golde, 2103. Elsewhere,
_covered, ornamented with gold plate_: nom. sg. sweord ... faeted, 2702;
acc. sg. faeted waege, 2254, 2283; acc. pl. faette scyldas, 333; faette beagas,
1751. [faeted, etc.]

faeted-hleor, adj., phaleratus gena (Dietr.): acc. pl. eahta mearas
faeted-hleore (_eight horses with bridles covered with plates of gold_),
1037.

faet-gold, st. n., _gold in sheets_ or _plates_: acc. sg., 1922.

faege, adj.: 1) _forfeited to death, allotted to death by fate_: nom. sg.
faege, 1756, 2142, 2976; faege and ge-flymed, 847; fus and faege, 1242; acc.
sg. faegne flaesc-homan, 1569; dat. sg. faegum, 2078; gen. sg. faeges,
1528.--2) _dead_: dat. pl. ofer faegum (_over the warriors fallen in the
battle_), 3026.--Comp.: deaeth-, un-faege.

faeheth (_state of hostility_, see fah), st. f., _hostile act, feud, battle_:
nom. sg. faeheth, 2404, 3062; acc. sg. faehethe, 153, 459, 470, 596, 1334, etc.;
also of the unhappy bowshot of the Hreethling, Haeethcyn, by which he killed his
brother, 2466; dat. sg. fore faehethe and fyrene, 137; nalas for faehethe mearn
(_did not recoil from the combat_), 1538; gen. sg, ne gefeah he þaere faehethe,
109; gen. pl. faehetha gemyndig, 2690.--Comp. wael-faeheth.

faehetho, st. f., same as above: nom. sg. sio faehetho, 3000; acc. faehetho, 2490.

faelsian, w. v., _to bring into a good condition, to cleanse_: inf. þaet ic
mote ... Heorot faelsian (from the plague of Grendel), 432; pret. Hroethgares
... sele faelsode, 2353.

ge-faelsian, w. v., same as above: pret. part. haefde gefaelsod ... sele
Hroethgares, 826; Heorot is gefaelsod, 1177; waeron yeth-gebland eal gefaelsod,
1621.

faemne, w. f., _virgin, recens nupta_: dat. sg. faemnan, 2035; gen. sg.
faemnan, 2060, both times of Hroethgar's daughter Freaware.

faer, st. m., _sudden, unexpected attack_: nom. sg. (attack upon Hnaef's band
by Finn's), 1069, 2231.

faer-gripe, st. m., _sudden, treacherous gripe, attack_: nom. sg. faer-gripe
flodes, 1517; dat. pl. under faergripum, 739.

faer-gryre, st. m., _fright caused by a sudden attack_: dat. pl. wieth
faer-gryrum (against the inroads of Grendel into Heorot), 174.

faeringa, adv., _suddenly, unexpectedly_, 1415, 1989.

faer-nieth, st. m., _hostility with sudden attacks_: gen. pl. hwaet me Grendel
hafaeth ... faernietha gefremed, 476.

feether-gearwe, st. f. pl. _(feather-equipment), the feathers of the shaft of
the arrow_: dat. (instr.) pl. sceft feether-gearwum fus, 3120.

fel, st. n., _skin, hide_: dat. pl. glof ... gegyrwed dracan fellum, _made
of the skins of dragons_, 2089.

fela, I., adj. indecl., _much, many_: as subst.: acc. sg. fela fricgende,
2107. With worn placed before: hwaet þu worn fela ... ymb Brecan spraece,
_how very much you spoke about Breca_, 530.--With gen. sg.: acc. sg. fela
fyrene, 810; wyrm-cynnes fela, 1426; worna fela sorge, 2004; to fela micles
... Denigea leode, _too much of the race of the Danes_, 695; uncuethes fela,
877; fela laethes, 930; fela leofes and laethes, 1061.--With gen. pl.: nom. sg.
fela madma, 36; fela þaera wera and wifa, 993, etc.; acc. sg. fela missera,
153; fela fyrena, 164; ofer landa fela, 311; maethethum-sigla fela (falo, MS.),
2758; ne me swor fela aetha on unriht, _swore no false oaths_, 2739, etc.;
worn fela maethma, 1784; worna fela guetha, 2543.--Comp. eal-fela.

II., adverbial, _very_, 1386, 2103, 2951.

fela-hror, adj., valde agitatus, _very active against the enemy, very
warlike_, 27.

fela-modig, adj., _very courageous_: gen. pl. -modigra, 1638, 1889.

fela-synnig, adj., _very criminal, very guilty_: acc. sg. fela-sinnigne
secg (in MS., on account of the alliteration, changed to simple sinnigne),
1380.

feolan, st. v., _to betake one's self into a place, to conceal one's self_:
pret. siethethan inne fealh Grendles modor (in Heorot), 1282; þaer inne fealh
secg syn-bysig (in the dragon's cave), 2227.--_to fall into, undergo,
endure_: searoniethas fealh, 1201.

aet-feolan, w. dat., insistere, adhaerere: pret. no ic him þaes georne aetfealh
_(held him not fast enough_, 969.

fen, st. n., _fen, moor_: acc. sg. fen, 104; dat. sg. to fenne, 1296;
fenne, 2010.

fen-freoetho, st. f., _refuge in the fen_: dat. sg. in fen-freoetho, 852.

feng, st. m., _gripe, embrace_: nom. sg. fyres feng, 1765; acc. sg. fara
feng (of the hostile sea-monsters), 578.--Comp. inwit-feng.

fengel (probably _he who takes possession_, cf. to fon, 1756, and fon to
rice, _to enter upon the government_), st. m., _lord, prince, king_: nom.
sg. wisa fengel, 1401; snottra fengel, 1476, 2157; hringa fengel, 2346.

fen-ge-lad, st. n., _fen-paths, fen with paths_: acc. pl. frecne fengelad
(_fens difficult of access_), 1360.

fen-hlieth, st. n., _marshy precipice_: acc. pl. under fen-hleoethu, 821.

fen-hop, st. n., _refuge in the fen_: acc. pl. on fen-hopu, 765.

ferh, st. m. n., _life_; see feorh.

ferh, st. m., _hog, boar_, here of the boar-image on the helmet: nom. sg.,
305.

ferheth, st. m., _heart, soul_: dat. sg. on ferhethe, 755, 949, 1719; gehwylc
hiora his ferhethe treowde, þaet ..., _each of them trusted to his_
(Hunfereth's) _heart, that_ ..., 1167; gen. sg. ferhethes fore-þanc, 1061; dat.
pl. (adverbial) ferhethum faegne, _happy at heart_, 1634; þaet mon ... ferhethum
freoge, _that one ... heartily love_, 3178.--Comp.: collen-, sarig-,
swift-, wide-ferheth.

ferheth-frec, adj., _having good courage, bold, brave_: acc. sg. ferheth-frecan
Fin, 1147.

ferheth-geniethla, w. m., _mortal enemy_: acc. sg. ferheth-geniethlan, of the
drake, 2882.

ferian, w. v. w. acc., _to bear, to bring, to conduct_: pres. II. pl.
hwanon ferigeaeth faette scyldas, 333; pret. pl. to scypum feredon eal
ingesteald eorethcyninges, 1155; similarly, feredon, 1159, 3114.

aet-ferian, _to carry away, to bear off_: pret. ic þaet hilt þanan feondum
aetferede, 1669.

ge-ferian, _bear, to bring, to lead_: pres. subj. I. pl. þonne (we)
geferian frean userne, 3108; inf. geferian ... Grendles heafod, 1639; pret.
þaet hi ut geferedon dyre maethmas, 3131; pret. part. her syndon geferede
feorran cumene ... Geata leode, _men of the Geatas, come from afar, have
been brought hither_ (by ship), 361.

oeth-ferian, _to tear away, to take away_: pret. sg. I. unsofte þonan feorh
oeth-ferede, 2142.

of-ferian, _to carry off, to take away, to tear away_: pret. oether swylc ut
offerede, _took away another such_ (sc. fifteen), 1584.

fetel-hilt, st. n., _sword-hilt_, with the gold chains fastened to it: acc.
(sg. or pl.?), 1564. (See "Leitfaden f. nord. Altertumskunde," pp.45, 46.)

fetian, w. v., _to bring near, bring_: pres. subj. nah hwa ... fe[tige]
faeted waege, _bring the gold-chased tankard_, 2254; pret. part. hraethe waes to
bure Beowulf fetod, 1311.

ge-fetian, _to bring_: inf. het þa eorla hleo in gefetian Hreethles lafe,
_caused Hreethel's sword to be brought_, 2191.

a-fedan, w. v., _to nourish, to bring up_: pret. part. þaer he afeded waes,
694.

feetha (O.H.G. fendo), w. m.: 1) _foot-soldiers_: nom. pl. feethan, 1328,
2545.--2) collective in sing., _band of foot-soldiers, troop of warriors_:
nom. feetha eal gesaet, 1425; dat. on feethan, 2498, 2920.--Comp. gum-feetha.

feethe, st. n., _gait, going, pace_: dat. sg. waes to foremihtig feond on
feethe, _the enemy was too strong in going_ (i.e. could flee too fast), 971.

feethe-cempa, w. m., _foot-soldier_: nom. sg., 1545, 2854.

feethe-gaest, st. m., _guest coming on foot_: dat. pl. feethe-gestum, 1977.

feethe-last, st. m., _signs of going, footprint_: dat. pl. ferdon foreth þonon
feethe-lastum, _went forth from there upon their trail_, i.e. by the same way
that they had gone, 1633.

feethe-wig, st. m., _battle on foot_: gen. sg. nealles Hetware hremge þorfton
(sc. wesan) feethe-wiges, 2365.

fel (= feol), st. f. _file_: gen. pl. fela lafe, _what the files have left
behind_ (that is, the swords), 1033.

feran, w. v., iter (A.S. for) facere, _to come, to go, to travel_: pres.
subj. II. pl. aer ge ... on land Dena furethur feran, _ere you go farther into
the land of the Danes_, 254; inf. feran on frean waere (_to die_), 27;
gewiton him þa feran (_set out upon their way_), 301; mael is me to feran,
316; feran ... gang sceawigan, _go, so as to see the footprints_, 1391;
wide feran, 2262; pret. ferdon folctogan ... wundor sceawian, _the princes
came to see the wonder_, 840; ferdon foreth, 1633.

ge-feran: 1) adire, _to arrive at_: pres. subj. þonne eorl ende gefere
lifgesceafta, _reach the end of life_, 3064; pret. part. haefde aeghwaeether
ende gefered laenan lifes, _frail life's end had both reached_, 2845.--2)
_to reach, to accomplish, to bring about_: pret. hafast þu gefered þaet ...,
1222, 1856.--3) _to behave one's self, to conduct one's self_: pret. frecne
geferdon, _had shown themselves daring_, 1692.

feal, st. m., _fall_: in comp. wael-feal.

feallan, st. v., _to fall, to fall headlong_: inf. feallan, 1071; pret. sg.
þaet he on hrusan ne feol, _that it_ (the hall) _did not fall to the
ground_, 773; similarly, feoll on foldan, 2976; feoll on feethan (dat. sg.),
_fell in the band_ (of his warriors), 2920; pret. pl. þonne walu feollon,
1043.

be-feallen, pret. part. w. dat. or instr., _deprived of, robbed_: freondum
befeallen, _robbed of friends_, 1127; sceal se hearda helm ... faetum
befeallen (sc. wesan), _be robbed of its gold mountings_ (the gold mounting
will fall away from it moldering), 2257.

ge-feallan, _to fall, to sink down_: pres. sg. III. þaet se lic-homa ...
faege gefealleeth, _that the body doomed to die sinks down_, 1756.--Also, with
the acc. of the place whither: pret. meregrund gefeoll, 2101; he eorethan
gefeoll, 2835.

fealu, adj., _fallow, dun-colored, tawny_: acc. sg. ofer fealone flod
(_over the sea_), 1951; fealwe straete (with reference to 320), 917; acc.
pl. leton on geflit faran fealwe mearas, 866.--Comp. aeppel-fealo.

feax, st. n., _hair, hair of the head_: dat. sg. waes be feaxe on flet boren
Grendles heafod, _was carried by the hair into the hall_, 1648; him ...
swat ... sprong foreth under fexe, _the blood sprang out under the hair of
his head_, 2968.--Comp.: blonden-, gamol-, wunden-feax.

ge-fea, w. m., _joy_: acc. sg. þaere fylle gefean, _joy at the abundant
repast_, 562; ic þaes ealles maeg ... gefean habban (_can rejoice at all
this_), 2741.

fea, adj., _few_ dat. pl. nemne feaum anum, _except some few_, 1082; gen.
pl. feara sum, _as one of a few, with a few_, 1413; feara sumne, _one of a
few (some few)_, 3062. With gen. following: acc. pl. fea worda cwaeeth, _spoke
few words_, 2663, 2247.

fea-sceaft, adj., _miserable, unhappy, helpless_: nom. sg. syethethan aerest
weareth feasceaft funden, 7; feasceaft guma (Grendel), 974; dat. sg.
feasceaftum men, 2286; Eadgilse ... feasceaftum, 2394; nom. pl. feasceafte
(the Geatas robbed of their king, Hygelac), 2374.

feoh, feo, st. n., (_properly cattle, herd_) here, _possessions, property,
treasure_: instr. sg. ne wolde ... feorh-bealo feo þingian, _would not
allay life's evil for treasure_ (tribute), 156; similarly, þa faehethe feo
þingode, 470; ic þe þa faehethe feo leanige, 1381.

ge-feohan, ge-feon, st. v. w. gen. and instr., _to enjoy one's self, to
rejoice at something_: a) w. gen.: pret. sg. ne gefeah he þaere faehethe, 109;
hilde gefeh, beado-weorces, 2299; pl. fylle gefaegon, _enjoyed themselves at
the bounteous repast_, 1015; þeodnes gefegon, _rejoiced at_ (the return of)
_the ruler_, 1628.--b) w. instr.: niht-weorce gefeh, ellen-maerethum, 828;
secg weorce gefeh, 1570; saelace gefeah, maegen-byrethenne þara þe he him mid
haefde, _rejoiced at the gift of the sea, and at the great burden of that_
(Grendel's head and the sword-hilt) _which he had with him_, 1625.

feoh-gift, -gyft, st. f., _bestowing of gifts_ or _treasures_: gen. sg.
þaere feoh-gyfte, 1026; dat. pl. aet feohgyftum, 1090; fromum feohgiftum,
_with rich gifts_, 21.

feoh-leas, adj., _that cannot be atoned for through gifts_: nom. sg. þaet
waes feoh-leas gefeoht, _a deed of arms that cannot be expiated_ (the
killing of his brother by Haeethcyn), 2442.

ge-feoht, st. n., _combat; warlike deed_: nom. sg. (the killing of his
brother by Haeethcyn), 2442; dat. sg. mece þone þin fader to gefeohte baer,
_the sword which thy father bore to the combat_, 2049.

ge-feohtan, st. v., _to fight_: inf. w. acc. ne mehte ... wig Hengeste wiht
gefeohtan (_could by no means offer Hengest battle_), 1084.

feohte, w. f., _combat_: acc. sg. feohtan, 576, 960. See were-fyhte.

feor, adj., _far, remote_: nom. sg. nis þaet feor heonon, 1362; naes him feor
þanon to gesecanne sinces bryttan, 1922; acc. sg. feor eal (_all that is
far, past_), 1702.

feor, adv., _far, far away_: a) of space, 42, 109, 809, 1806, 1917; feor
and (oethethe) neah, _far and (or) near_, 1222, 2871; feorr, 2267.--b) of time:
ge feor hafaeth faehethe gestaeled (_has placed us under her enmity henceforth_),
1341.

Comparative, fyr, feorr, and feor: fyr and faestor, 143; fyr, 252; feorr,
1989; feor, 542.

feor-buend, pt., _dwelling far away_: nom. pl. ge feor-buend, 254.

feor-cyeth, st. f., _home of those living far away, distant land_: nom, pl.
feor-cyethethe beoeth selran gesohte þaem þe him selfa deah, _foreign lands are
better sought by him who trusts to his own ability_, 1839.

feorh, ferh (Goth. fairhvu-s, _world_), st. m. and n., _life, principle of
life, soul_: nom. sg. feorh, 2124; no þon lange waes feorh aeethelinges flaesce
bewunden, _not for much longer was the soul of the prince enveloped in the
body_ (he was near death), 2425; ferh ellen wraec, _life expelled the
strength_ (i.e. with the departing life the strength disappeared also),
2707; acc. sg. feorh ealgian, 797, 2656, 2669; feorh gehealdan, _preserve
his life_, 2857; feorh alegde, _gave up his life_, 852; similarly, aer he
feorh seleeth, 1371; feorh oethferede, _tore away her life_, 2142; oeth þaet hie
forlaeddan to þam lindplegan swaese gesiethas ond hyra sylfra feorh, _till in
an evil hour they carried into battle their dear companions and their
lives_ (i.e. led them to their death), 2041; gif þu þin feorh hafast, 1850;
ymb feorh sacan (_to fight for life_), 439; waes in feorh dropen, _was
wounded into his life_, i.e. mortally, 2982; widan feorh, as temporal acc.,
_through a wide life_, i.e. always, 2015; dat. sg. feore, 1294, 1549; to
widan feore, _for a wide life_, i.e. at all times, 934; on swa geongum
feore (_at a so youthful age_), 1844; as instr., 578, 3014; gen. sg.
feores, 1434, 1943; dat. pl. buton ... feorum gumena, 73; freonda feorum,
1307.--Also, _body, corpse_: þa waes heal hroden feonda feorum (_the hall
was covered with the slain of the enemy_), 1153; gehwearf þa in Francna
faeethm feorh cyninges, _then the body of the king_ (Hygelac) _fell into the
power of the Franks_, 1211. --Comp. geogoeth-feorh.

feorh-bana, w. m., _(life-slayer), man-slayer, murderer_: dat. sg.
feorh-bonan, 2466.

feorh-ben, st. f., _wound that takes away life, mortal wound_: dat.
(instr.) pl. feorh-bennum seoc, 2741.

feorh-bealu, st. n., _evil destroying life, violent death_: nom. sg., 2078,
2251, 2538; acc. sg., 156.

feorh-cyn, st. n., _race of the living, mankind_: gen. pl. fela
feorh-cynna, 2267.

feorh-geniethla, w. m., _he who seeks life, life's enemy_ (N.H.G. Tod-feind),
_mortal enemy_: acc. sg. -geniethlan, 1541; dat. sg. -geniethlan, 970; acc. sg.
braegd feorh-geniethlan, 1541; acc. pl. folgode feorh-geniethlan, (Ongenþeow)
_pursued his mortal enemies_, 2934.

feorh-lagu, st. f., _the life allotted to anyone, life determined by fate_:
acc. sg. on maethma hord mine (minne, MS.) bebohte frode feorh-lege, _for the
treasure-hoard I sold my old life_, 2801.

feorh-last, st. m., _trace of (vanishing) life, sign of death _: acc. pl.
feorh-lastas baer, 847.

feorh-seoc, adj., _mortally wounded_: nom. sg., 821.

feorh-sweng, st. m., _(stroke robbing of life), fatal blow_: acc. sg.,
2490.

feorh-wund, st. f., _mortal wound, fatal injury_: acc. sg. feorh-wunde
hleat, 2386.

feorm, st. f., _subsistence, entertainment_: acc. sg. no þu ymb mines ne
þearft lices feorme leng sorgian, _thou needest no longer have care for the
sustenance of my body_, 451.--2) _banquet_: dat. on feorme (or feorme,
MS.), 2386.

feormend-leas, adj., _wanting the. cleanser_: acc. pl. geseah ...
fyrn-manna fatu feormend-lease, 2762.

feormian, w. v., _to clean, to cleanse, to polish_: pres. part. nom pl.
feormiend swefaeth (feormynd, MS.), 2257.

ge-feormian, w. v., _to feast, to eat_; pret. part. sona haefde unlyfigendes
eal gefeormod fet and folma, 745.

feorran, w. v., w. acc., _to remove_: inf. sibbe ne wolde wieth manna hwone
maegenes Deniga feorh-bealo feorran, feo þingian, (Grendel) _would not from
friendship free any one of the men of the Danes of life's evil, nor allay
it for tribute_, 156.

feorran, adv., _from afar_: a) of space, 361, 430, 826, 1371, 1820, etc.;
siethethan aeethelingas feorran gefricgean fleam eowerne, _when noble men afar
learn of your flight_ (when the news of your flight reaches distant lands),
2890; ferdon folctogan feorran and nean, _from far and from near_, 840;
similarly, nean and feorran þu nu [friethu] hafast, 1175; waes þaes wyrmes wig
wide gesyne ... nean and feorran, _visible from afar, far and near_,
2318.--b) temporal: se þe cuethe frumsceaft fira feorran reccan (_since
remote antiquity_), 91; similarly, feorran rehte, 2107.

feorran-cund, adj., _foreign-born_: dat. sg. feorran-cundum, 1796.

feor-weg, st. m., _far way_: dat. pl. madma fela of feorwegum, _many
precious things from distant paths_ (from foreign lands), 37.

ge-feon. See feohan.

feond, st. m., _enemy_: nom. sg., 164, 726, 749; feond on helle (Grendel),
101; acc. sg., 279, 1865, 2707; dat. sg. feonde, 143, 439; gen. sg.
feondes, 985, 2129, 2290; acc, pl. feond, 699; dat. pl. feondum, 420, 1670;
gen. pl. feonda 294, 809, 904.

feond-grap, st. f., _foe's clutch_: dat. (instr.) pl. feond-grapum faest,
637.

feond-sceaetha, w. m., _one who is an enemy and a robber_: nom. sg. fah
feond-scaetha (_a hostile sea-monster_), 554.

feond-scipe, st. m., _hostility_: nom. sg., 3000.

feower, num., _four_: nom. feower bearn, 59; feower mearas, 2164; feower,
as substantive, 1638; acc. feower maethmas, 1028.

feower-tyne, num., _fourteen_: nom. with following gen. pl. feowertyne
Geata, 1642.

findan, st. v., _to find, to invent, to attain_: a) with simple object in
acc.: inf. þara þe he cenoste findan mihte, 207; swylce hie at Finnes-ham
findan meahton sigla searo-gimma, 1157; similarly, 2871; maeg þaer fela
freonda findan, 1839; wolde guman findan, 2295; swa hyt weorethlicost
fore-snotre men findan mihton, _so splendidly as only very wise men could
devise it_, 3164; pret. sg. healþegnas fand, 720; word oether fand, _found
other words_, i.e. went on to another narrative, 871; grimne gryrelicne
grund-hyrde fond, 2137; þaet ic godne funde beaga bryttan, 1487; pret. part.
syethethan aerest weareth feasceaft funden (_discovered_), 7.--b) with acc. and
pred. adj.: pret. sg. dryhten sinne driorigne fand, 2790.--c) with acc. and
inf.: pret. fand þa þaer inne aeethelinga gedriht swefan, 118; fand waeccendne
wer wiges bidan, 1268; hord-wynne fond opene standan, 2271; oeth þaet he
fyrgen-beamas ... hleonian funde, 1416; pret. pl. fundon þa sawulleasne
hlim-bed healdan, 3034.--d) with dependent clause: inf. no þy aer feasceafte
findan meahton aet þam aeethelinge þaet he Heardrede hlaford waere (_could by no
means obtain it from the prince_), 2374.

on-findan, _to be sensible of, to perceive, to notice_: a) w. acc.: pret.
sg. landweard onfand eftsieth eorla, _the coast-guard observed the return of
the earls_, 1892; pret. part. þa heo onfunden waes (_was discovered_),
1294.--b) w. depend, clause: pret. sg. þa se gist onfand þaet se beado-leoma
bitan nolde, _the stranger_ (Beowulf) _perceived that the sword would not
cut_, 1523; sona þaet onfunde, þaet ..., _immediately perceived that_...,
751; similarly, 810, 1498.

finger, st. m., _finger_: nom. pl. fingras, 761; acc. pl. fingras, 985;
dat. (instr.) pl. fingrum, 1506; gen. pl. fingra, 765.

firas, fyras (O.H.G. firahi, i.e. _the living_; cf. feorh), st. m., only in
pl., _men_: gen. pl. fira, 91, 2742; monegum fira, 2002; fyra gehwylcne
leoda minra, 2251; fira fyrngeweorc, 2287.

firen, fyren, st. f., _cunning waylaying, insidious hostility, malice,
outrage_: nom. sg. fyren, 916; acc. sg. fyrene and faehethe, 153; faehethe and
fyrene, 880, 2481; firen' ondrysne, 1933; dat. sg. fore faehethe and fyrene,
137; gen. pl. fyrena, 164, 629; and fyrene, 812; fyrena hyrde (of Grendel),
751. The dat. pl., fyrenum, is used adverbially in the sense of
_maliciously_, 1745, or _fallaciously_, with reference to Haeethcyn's killing
Herebeald, which was done unintentionally, 2442.

firen-daed, st. f., _wicked deed_: acc. pl. fyren-daeda, 1670; instr. pl.
fyren-daedum, 1002; both times of Grendel and his mother, with reference to
their nocturnal inroads.

firen-þearf, st. f., _misery through the malignity of enemies_: acc. sg.
fyren-þearfe, 14.

firgen-beam, st. m., _tree of a mountain-forest_: acc. pl. fyrgen-beamas,
1415.

firgen-holt, st. m., _mountain-wood, mountain-forest_: acc. sg. on
fyrgen-holt, 1394.

firgen-stream, st. m., _mountain-stream_: nom. sg. fyrgen-stream, 1360;
acc. sg. under fyrgen-stream (marks the place where the mountain-stream,
according to 1360, empties into Grendel's sea), 2129.

fisc, st. m., _fish_: in comp. hron-, mere-fisc.

fif, num., _five_: uninflect. gen. fif nihta fyrst, 545; acc. fife (?),
420.

fifel-cyn (O.N. fifl, stultus and gigas), st. n., _giant-race_: gen. sg.
fifelcynnes eard, 104.

fif-tene, fif-tyne, num., _fifteen_: acc. fyftyne, 1583; gen. fiftena sum,
207.

fif-tig, num., _fifty_: 1) as substantive with gen. following; acc. fiftig
wintra, 2734; gen. se waes fiftiges fot-gemearces lang, 3043.--2) as
adjective: acc. fiftig wintru, 2210.

flan, st. m., _arrow_: dat. sg. flane, 3120; as instr., 2439.

flan-boga, w. m., _bow which shoots the flan, bow_: dat. sg. of flan-bogan,
1434, 1745.

flaesc, st. n., _flesh, body in contrast with soul_: instr. sg. no þon lange
waes feorh aeethelinges flaesce bewunden, _not much longer was the son of the
prince contained in his body_, 2425.

flaesc-hama, w. m., _clothing of flesh_, i.e. the body: acc. sg.
flaesc-homan, 1569.

flet, st. n.: 1) _ground, floor of a hall_: acc. sg. heo on flet gebeah,
_fell to the ground_, 1541; similarly, 1569.--2) _hall, mansion_: nom. sg.
1977; acc. sg. flet, 1037, 1648, 1950, 2018, etc.; flett, 2035; þaet hie him
oether flet eal gerymdon, _that they should give up entirely to them another
hall_, 1087; dat. sg. on flette, 1026.

flet-raest, st. f., _resting-place in the hall_: acc. sg. flet-raeste gebeag,
_reclined upon the couch in the hall_, 1242.

flet-sittend, pres. part., _sitting in the hall_: acc. pl -sittende, 2023;
dat. pl. -sittendum, 1789.

flet-werod, st. n., _troop from the hall_: nom. sg., 476.

fleam, st. m., _flight_: acc. sg. on fleam gewand, _had turned to flight_,
1002; fleam eowerne, 2890.

fleogan, st. v., _to fly_: prs. sg. III. fleogeeth, 2274.

fleon, st. v., _to flee_: inf. on heolster fleon, 756; fleon on fenhopu,
765; fleon under fen-hleoethu, 821; pret. hete-swengeas fleah, 2226.

be-fleon, w. acc., _to avoid, to escape_: gerund no þaet yethe byeth to
befleonne, _that is not easy_ (i.e. not at all) _to be avoided_, 1004.

ofer-fleon, w. acc., _to flee from one, to yield_: inf. nelle ic beorges
weard oferfleon fotes trem, _will not yield to the warder of the mountain_
(the drake) _a foot's breadth_, 2526.

fleotan, st. v., _to float upon the water, to swim_: inf. no he wiht fram
me flod-yethum feor fleotan meahte. hraethor on helme, _no whit, could he swim
from me farther on the waves_ (regarded as instrumental, so that the waves
marked the distance), _more swiftly in the sea_, 542; pret. saegenga fleat
famigheals foreth ofer yethe, _floated away over the waves_, 1910.

fliht. See flyht.

flitme. See un-flitme.

flitan, st. v., _to exert one's self, to strive, to emulate_: pres. part.
flitende fealwe straete mearum maeton (_rode a race_), 917; pret. sg. II.
eart þu se Beowulf, se þe wieth Brecan ... ymb sund flite, _art thou the
Beowulf who once contended with Breca for the prize in swimming?_ 507.

ofer-flitan, _to surpass one in a contest, to conquer, to overcome_: pret.
w. acc. he þe aet sunde oferflat (_overcome thee in a swimming-wager_), 517.

ge-flit, st. n., _emulation_: acc. sg. leton on geflit faran fealwe mearas,
_let the fallow horses go in emulation_, 866.

floga, w. m., _flyer_; in the compounds: gueth-, lyft-, uht-, wieth-floga.

flota (see fleotan), w. m., _float, ship, boat_: nom. sg., 210, 218, 301;
acc. sg. flotan eowerne, 294.--Comp. waeg-flota.

flot-here, st. m., _fleet_: instr. sg. cwom faran flotherge on Fresna land,
2916.

flod, st. m., _flood, stream, sea-current_: nom. sg., 545, 580, 1362, etc.;
acc. sg. flod, 3134; ofer fealone flod, 1951; dat. sg. to flode, 1889; gen.
pl. floda begong, _the region of floods_, i.e. the sea, 1498, 1827; floda
genipu, 2809.

flod-yeth, st. f., _flood-wave_: instr. pl. flod-yethum, 542.

flor, st. m., _floor, stone-floor_: acc. sg. on fagne flor (the floor was
probably a kind of mosaic, made of colored flags), 726; dat. sg. gang þa
aefter flore, _along the floor_ (i.e. along the hall), 1317.

flyht, fliht, st. m., _flight_: nom. sg. gares fliht, _flight of the
spear_, 1766.

ge-flyman, w. v., _to put to flight_: pret. part. geflymed, 847, 1371.

folc, st. n., _troop, band of warriors; folk_, in the sense of the whole
body of the fighting men of a nation: acc. sg. folc, 522, 694, 912; Suethdene
folc, 464; folc and rice, 1180; dat. sg. folce, 14, 2596; folce Deninga,
465; as instr. folce gestepte ofer sae side, _went with a band of warriors
over the wide sea_, 2394; gen. sg. folces, 1125; folces Denigea, 1583.--The
king is called folces hyrde, 611, 1833, 2645, 2982; freawine folces, 2358;
or folces weard, 2514. The queen, folces cwen, 1933.--The pl., in the sense
of _warriors, fighting men_: nom. pl. folc, 1423, 2949; dat. pl. folcum,
55, 262, 1856; gen. pl. freo- (frea-) wine folca, _of the king_, 430, 2430;
friethu-sibb folca, _of the queen_, 2018.--Comp. sige-folc.

folc-agend, pres. part., _leader of a band of warriors_: nom. pl.
folc-agende, 3114.

folc-beorn, st. m., _man of the multitude, a common man_: nom. sg.
folc-beorn, 2222.

folc-cwen, st. f., _queen of a warlike host_: nom. sg., of Wealhþeow, 642.

folc-cyning, st. m., _king of a warlike host_: nom. sg., 2734, 2874.

folc-raed, st. m, _what best serves a warlike host_: acc. sg., 3007.

folc-riht, st. n., _the rights of the fighting men of a nation_: gen. pl.
him aer forgeaf ... folcrihta gehwylc, swa his faeder ahte, 2609.

folc-scearu, st. f., _part of a host of warriors, nation_: dat. sg.
folc-scare, 73.

folc-stede, st. m., _position of a band of warriors, place where a band of
warriors is quartered_: acc. sg. folcstede, of the hall, Heorot, 76;
folcstede fara (_the battle-field_), 1464.

folc-toga, w. m., _leader of a body of warriors, duke_: nom. pl., powerful
liege-men of Hroethgar are called folc-togan, 840.

fold-bold, st. n., _earth-house_ (i.e. a house on earth in contrast with a
dwelling in heaven): nom. sg. faeger fold-bold, of the hall, Heorot, 774.

fold-buend, pres. part. _dweller on earth, man_: nom. pl. fold-buend, 2275;
fold-buende, 1356; dat. pl. fold-buendum, 309.

folde, w. f., _earth, ground_: acc. sg. under foldan, 1362; feoll on
foldan, 2976; gen. sg. foldan bearm, _the bosom of the earth_, 1138; foldan
sceatas, 96; foldan faeethm, 1394.--Also, _earth, world_: dat. sg. on foldan,
1197.

fold-weg, st. m., _field-way, road through the country_: acc. sg. fold-weg,
1634; acc. pl. fold-wegas, 867.

folgian, w. v.: 1) _to perform vassal-duty, to serve, to follow_: pret. pl.
þeah hie hira beaggyfan banan folgedon, _although they followed the
murderer of their prince_, 1103.--2) _to pursue, to follow after_: folgode
feorh-geniethlan (acc. pl.) 2934.

folm, st. f, _hand_: acc. sg. folme, 971, 1304; dat. sg. mid folme, 743;
acc. pl. fet and folma, _feet and hands_, 746; dat. pl. to banan folmum,
158; folmum (instr.), 723, 993.--Comp.: beado-, gearo-folm.

for, prep. w. dat., instr., and acc.: 1) w. dat. local, _before_, ante: þaet
he for eaxlum gestod Deniga frean, 358; for hlawe, 1121.--b) _before_,
coram, in conspectu: no he þaere feohgyfte for sceotendum scamigan þorfte,
_had no need to be ashamed of the gift before the warriors_, 1027; for þaem
werede, 1216; for eorlum, 1650; for duguethe, _before the noble band of
warriors_, 2021.--Causal, a) to denote a subjective motive, _on account of,
through, from_: for wlenco, _from bravery, through warlike courage_, 338,
1207; for wlence, 508; for his wonhydum, 434; for onmedlan, 2927, etc.--b)
objective, partly denoting a cause, _through, from, by reason of_: for
metode, _for the creator, on account of the creator_, 169; for þreanydum,
833; for þreanedlan, 2225; for dolgilpe, _on account of, in accordance with
the promise of bold deeds_ (because you claimed bold deeds for yourself),
509; him for hrofsele hrinan ne mehte faer-gripe flodes, _on account of the
roofed hall the malicious grasp of the flood could not reach him_, 1516;
lig-egesan waeg for horde, _on account of_ (the robbing of) _the treasure_,
2782; for mundgripe minum, _on account of, through the gripe of my hand_,
966; for þaes hildfruman hondgeweorce, 2836; for swenge, _through the
stroke_, 2967; ne meahte ... deop gedygan for dracan lege, _could not hold
out in the deep on account of the heat of the drake_, 2550. Here may be
added such passages as ic þaem godan sceal for his modþraece maethmas beodan,
_will offer him treasures on account of his boldness of character, for his
high courage_, 385; ful-oft for laessan lean teohhode, _gave often reward
for what was inferior_, 952; nalles for ealdre mearn, _was not uneasy about
his life_, 1443; similarly, 1538. Also denoting purpose: for arstafum, _to
the assistance_, 382, 458.--2) w. instr. causal, _because of, for_: he hine
feor forwraec for þy mane, 110.--3) w. acc., _for, as, instead of_: for sunu
freogan, _love as a son_, 948; for sunu habban, 1176; ne him þaes wyrmes wig
for wiht dyde, _held the drake's fighting as nothing_, 2349.

foran, adv., _before, among the first, forward_: siethethan ... sceawedon
feondes fingras, foran aeghwylc (_each before himself_), 985; þaet waes an
foran ealdgestreona, _that was one among the first of the old treasures_,
i.e. a splendid old treasure, 1459; þe him foran ongean linde baeron, _bore
their shields forward against him_ (went out to fight against him), 2365.

be-foran: 1) adv., local, _before_: he ... beforan gengde, _went before_,
1413; temporal, _before, earlier_, 2498.--2) prep. w. acc. _before_, in
conspectu: maere maethethum-sweord manige gesawon beforan beorn beran, 1025.

ford, st. m., _ford, water-way_: acc. sg. ymb brontne ford, 568.

foreth: 1) local, _forth, hither, near_: foreth near aetstop, _approached
nearer_, 746; þa cwom Wealhþeo foreth gan, 1163; similarly, 613; him seleþegn
foreth wisade, _led him_ (Beowulf) _forth_ (to the couch that had been
prepared for him in Heorot), 1796; þaet him swat sprong foreth under fexe,
_forth under the hair of his head_, 2968. _Forward, further_: gewitaeth foreth
beran waepen and gewaedu, 291; he to foreth gestop, 2290; freoetho-wong þone foreth
ofereodon, 2960. _Away, forth_, 45, 904; fyrst foreth gewat, _the time_ (of
the way to the ship) _was out_, i.e. they had arrived at the ship, 210; me
... foreth-gewitenum, _to me the departed_, 1480; ferdon foreth, _went forth_
(from Grendel's sea), 1633; þonne he foreth scile, _when he must (go) forth_,
i.e. die, 3178; hine mihtig god ... ofer ealle men foreth gefremede, _carried
him forth, over all men_, 1719.--2) temporal, _forth, from now on_: heald
foreth tela niwe sibbe, 949; ic sceal foreth sprecan gen ymbe Grendel, _shall
from now on speak again of Grendel_, 2070. See furethum and furethor.

foreth-gerimed, pres. part., _in unbroken succession_, 59.

foreth-gesceaft, st. f., _that which is determined for farther on, future
destiny_: acc. sg. he þa foreth-gesceaft forgyteeth and forgymeeth, 1751.

foreth-weg, st. m., _road that leads away, journey_: he of ealdre gewat frod
on foreth-weg (_upon the way to the next world_), 2626.

fore, prep. w. dat., local, _before_, coram, in conspectu: heo fore þaem
werede spraec, 1216. Causal, _through, for, because of_: no mearn fore faehethe
and fyrene, 136; fore faeder daedum, _because of the father's deeds_,
2060,--Allied to this is the meaning, _about_, de, super: þaer waes sang and
sweg samod aetgaedere fore Healfdenes hildewisan, _song and music about
Healfdene's general_ (the song of Hnaef), 1065.

fore-maere, adj., _renowned beyond (others)_, praeclarus: superl. þaet waes
fore-maerost foldbuendum receda under roderum, 309.

fore-mihtig, adj., _able beyond (others)_, praepotens: nom. sg. waes to
foremihtig feond on feethe, _the enemy was too strong in going_ (could flee
too rapidly), 970.

fore-snotor, adj., _wise beyond (others)_, sapientissimus: nom. pl.
foresnotre men, 3164.

fore-þanc, st. m., _forethought, consideration, deliberation_: nom. sg.,
1061.

forht, adj., _fearful, cowardly_: nom. sg. forht, 2968; he on mode weareth
forht on ferhethe, 755.--Comp. unforht.

forma, adj., _foremost, first_: nom. sg. forma sieth (_the first time_), 717,
1464, 1528, 2626; instr. sg. forman siethe, 741, 2287; forman dogore, 2574.

fyrmest, adv. superl., _first of all, in the first place_: he fyrmest laeg,
2078.

forst, st. m., _frost, cold_: gen. sg. forstes bend, 1610.

for-þam, for-þan, for-þon, adv. and conj., _therefore, on that account,
then_: forþam, 149; forþan, 418, 680, 1060; forþon þe, _because_, 503.

fon, st. v., _to catch, to grasp, to take hold, to take_: prs. sg. III.
feheth oether to, _another lays hold_ (takes possession), 1756; inf. ic mid
grape sceal fon wieth feonde, 439; pret. sg. him togeanes feng, _caught at
him, grasped at him_, 1543; w. dat. he þam fraetwum feng, _received the rich
adornments_ (Ongenþeow's equipment), 2990.

be-fon, _to surround, to ensnare, to encompass, to embrace_: pret. part.
hyne sar hafaeth ... nearwe befongen balwon bendum, 977; heo aeethelinga anne
haefde faeste befangen (_had seized him firmly_), 1296; helm ... befongen
freawrasnum (_encircled by an ornament like a diadem_), 1452; fenne
bifongen, _surrounded by the fen_, 2010; (draca) fyre befongen, _encircled
by fire_, 2275, 2596; haefde landwara lige befangen, _encompassed by fire_,
2322.

ge-fon, w. acc., _to seize, to grasp_: pret. he gefeng slaependne rinc, 741;
guethrinc gefeng atolan clommum, 1502; gefeng þa be eaxle ... Guethgeata leod
Grendles modor, 1538; gefeng þa fetelhilt, 1564; hond rond gefeng, geolwe
linde, 2610; ic on ofoste gefeng micle mid mundum maegen-byrethenne, _hastily
I seized with my hands the enormous burden_, 3091.

on-fon, w. dat., _to receive, to accept, to take_: pres. imp. sg. onfoh
þissum fulle, _accept this cup_, 1170; inf. þaet þaet þeodnes bearn ...
scolde faeder-aeethelum onfon, _receive the paternal rank_, 912; pret. sg. hwa
þaem hlaeste onfeng, _who received the ship's lading_, 52; hleor-bolster
onfeng eorles andwlitan, _the pillow received the nobleman's face_, 689;
similarly, 853, 1495; heal swege onfeng, _the hall received the loud
noise_, 1215; he onfeng hraethe inwit-þancum, _he_ (Beowulf) _at once
clutched him_ (Grendel) _devising malice_, 749.

þurh-fon, w. acc., _to break through with grasping, to destroy by
grasping_: inf. þaet heo þone fyrd-hom þurh-fon ne mihte, 1505.

wieth-fon, w. dat., _(to grasp at), to seize, to lay hold of_: pret. sg. him
faeste wieth-feng, 761.

ymbe-fon, w. acc., _to encircle_: pret. heals ealne ymbefeng biteran banum,
_encircled his_ (Beowulf's) _whole neck with sharp bones_ (teeth), 2692.

fot, st. m., _foot_: gen. sg. fotes trem (_the measure of a foot, a foot
broad_), 2526; acc. pl. fet, 746; dat. pl. aet fotum, _at the feet_, 500,
1167.

fot-gemearc, st. n., _measure, determining by feet, number of feet_: gen.
sg. se waes fiftiges fotgemearces lang (_fifty feet long_), 3043.

fot-last, st. m., _foot-print_: acc. sg. (draca) onfand feondes fot-last,
2290.

fracod, adj., _objectionable, useless_. nom. sg. naes seo ecg fracod
hilde-rince, 1576.

fram, from, I. prep. w. dat. loc. _away from something_: þaer fram sylle
abeag medubenc monig, 776, 1716; þanon eft gewiton ealdgesiethas ... fram
mere, 856; cyning-balde men from þaem holmclife hafelan baeron, 1636;
similarly, 541, 543, 2367. Standing after the dat.: he hine feor forwraec
... mancynne fram, 110; similarly, 1716. Also, _hither from something_: þa
ic cwom ... from feondum, 420; aeghwaeethrum waes ... broga fram oethrum,
2566.--Causal with verbs of saying and hearing, _of, about, concerning_:
saegdest from his siethe, 532; no ic wiht fram þe swylcra searo-nietha secgan
hyrde, 581; þaet he fram Sigemunde secgan hyrde, 876. II adv., _away,
thence_: no þy aer fram meahte, 755; _forth, out_: from aerest cwom orueth
aglaecean ut of stane, _the breath of the dragon came forth first from the
rock_ 2557.

fram, from, adj.: 1) _directed forwards, striving forwards_; in comp.
sieth-fram.--2) _excellent, splendid_, of a man with reference to his warlike
qualities: nom. sg. ic eom on mode from, 2528; nom. pl. frome fyrd-hwate,
1642, 2477. Of things: instr. pl. fromum feoh-giftum, 21.--Comp. un-from;
see freme, forma.

ge-fraegen. See frignan.

fraetwe, st. f. pl., _ornament, anything costly_, originally _carved
objects_ (cf. Dietrich in Hpts. Ztschr. X. 216 ff.), afterwards of any
costly and artistic work: acc. pl. fraetwe, 2920; beorhte fraetwe, 214;
beorhte fraetwa, 897; fraetwe.. eorclan-stanas, 1208; fraetwe,...
breost-weorethunge, 2504, both times of Hygelac's collar; fraetwe and
faet-gold, 1922; fraetwe (Eanmund's sword and armor), 2621; dat. instr. pl.
þam fraetwum, 2164; on fraetewum, 963; fraetwum (Heaethobeard sword) hremig,
2055; fraetwum, of the drake's treasures, 2785; fraetwum (Ongenþeow's armor),
2990; gen. pl. fela ... fraetwa, 37; þara fraetwa (drake's treasure), 2795;
fraetwa hyrde (drake), 3134.

fraetwan, w. v., _to supply with ornaments, to adorn_: inf. folc-stede
fraetwan, 76.

ge-fraetwian, w. v., _to adorn_: pret. sg. gefraetwade foldan sceatas leomum
and leafum, 96; pret. part. þa waes haten Heort innanweard folmum gefraetwod,
993.

ge-fraege, adj., _known by reputation, renowned_: nom. sg. leod-cyning ...
folcum gefraege, 55; swa hyt gefraege waes, 2481.

ge-fraege, st. n., _information through hearsay_: instr. sg. mine gefraege
(_as I learned through the narrative of others_), 777, 838, 1956, etc.

ge-fraegnian, w. v., _to become known through hearsay_: pret. part. fylle
gefraegnod (of Grendel's mother, who had become known through the carrying
off of Aeschere), 1334?

freca, w. m., properly _a wolf_, as one that breaks in, robs; here a
designation of heroes: nom. sg. freca Scildinga, of Beowulf, 1564.--Comp.:
gueth-, hilde-, scyld-, sweord-, wig-freca; fereth-frec (adj.).

fremde, adj., properly _distant, foreign_; then _estranged, hostile_: nom
sg. þaet waes fremde þeod ecean dryhtne, of the giants, 1692.

freme, adj., _excellent, splendid_: nom. sg. fem. fremu folces cwen, of
Þryetho, 1933(?).

fremman, w. v., _to press forward, to further_, hence: 1) in general, _to
perform, to accomplish, to do, to make_: pres. subj. without an object,
fremme se þe wille, _let him do (it) whoever will_, 1004. With acc.: imp.
pl. fremmaeth ge nu leoda þearfe, 2801; inf. fyrene fremman, 101; saecce
fremman, 2500; faehethe ... maerethum fremman, 2515, etc.; pret. sg. folcraed
fremede (_did what was best for his men_, i.e. ruled wisely), 3007; pl. hu
þa aeethelingas ellen fremedon, 3; feohtan fremedon, 960; nalles facenstafas
... þenden fremedon, 1020; pret. subj. þaet ic ... maeretho fremede, 2135. --2)
_to help on, to support_: inf. þaet he mec fremman wile wordum and worcum
(to an expedition), 1833.

ge-fremman, w. acc., _to do, to make, to render_: inf. gefremman eorlic
ellen, 637; helpan gefremman, _to give help_, 2450; aefter weaspelle wyrpe
gefremman, _to work a change after sorrow_ (to give joy after sorrow),
1316; gerund, to gefremmanne, 174, 2645; pret. sg. gefremede, 135, 165,
551, 585, etc.; þeah þe hine mihtig god ... ofer ealle men foreth gefremede,
_placed him away, above all men_, i.e. raised him, 1719; pret. pl.
gefremedon, 1188, 2479; pret. subj. gefremede, 177; pret. part. gefremed,
476; fem, nu scealc hafaeth ... daed gefremede, 941; absolutely, þu þe self
hafast daedum gefremed, þaet ..., _hast brought it about by thy deeds that_,
955.

fretan, st. v., _to devour, to consume_: inf. þa (the precious things)
sceal brond fretan, 3015; nu sceal gled fretan wigena strengel, 3115; pret.
sg. (Grendel) slaepende fraet folces Denigea fyftyne men, 1582.

frecne, adj., _dangerous, bold_: nom. sg. frecne fyr-draca, 2690;
feorh-bealo frecne, 2251, 2538; acc. sg. frecne daede, 890; frecne fengelad,
1360; frecne stowe, 1379; instr. sg. frecnan spraece (_through provoking
words_), 1105.

frecne, adv., _boldly, audaciously_, 960, 1033, 1692.

frea, w. m., _ruler, lord_, of a temporal ruler: nom. sg. frea, 2286; acc.
sg. frean, 351, 1320, 2538, 3003, 3108; gen. sg. frean, 359, 500, 1167,
1681; dat. sg. frean, 271, 291, 2663. Of a husband: dat. sg. eode ... to
hire frean sittan, 642. Of God: dat. sg. frean ealles, _the Lord of all_,
2795; gen. sg. frean, 27.-- Comp.: agend-, lif-, sin-frea.

frea-dryhten, st. m., _lord, ruling lord_: gen. sg. frea-drihtnes, 797.

frea-wine, st. m., _lord and friend, friendly ruler_: nom. sg. frea-wine
folces (folca), 2358, 2430; acc. sg. his frea-wine, 2439.

frea-wrasn, st. f., _encircling ornament like a diadem_: instr. pl. helm
... befongen freawrasnum, 1452; see wrasn.

freoethu, friethu, f., _protection, asylum, peace_: acc. sg. wel bieth þaem þe mot
... to faeder faeethmum freoetho wilnian, _who may obtain an asylum in God's
arms_, 188; nean and feorran þu nu [friethu] hafast, 1175.--Comp. fen-freoetho.

freoetho-burh, st. f., _castle, city affording protection_: acc. sg.
freoethoburh faegere, 522.

freoetho-wong, st. m., _field of peace, field of protection_: acc. sg., 2960;
seems to have been the proper name of a field.

freoetho-waer, st. f., _peace-alliance, security of peace_: acc. sg. þa hie
getruwedon on twa healfa faeste frioethu-waere, 1097; gen. sg. frioethowaere baed
hlaford sinne, _entreated his lord for the protection of peace_ (i.e. full
pardon for his delinquency), 2283.

freoetho-webbe, w. f., _peace-weaver_, designation of the royal consort
(often one given in marriage as a confirmation of a peace between two
nations): nom. sg., 1943.

freo-burh, st. f., = frea-burg (?), _ruler's castle_ (?) (according to
Grein, arx ingenua): acc. sg. freoburh, 694.

freod, st. f., _friendship_: acc. sg. freode ne woldon ofer heafo healdan,
2477; gen. sg. naes þaer mara fyrst freode to friclan, _was no longer time to
seek for friendship_, 2557; --_favor, acknowledgement_: acc. sg. ic þe
sceal mine gelaestan freode (_will show myself grateful_, with reference to
1381 ff.), 1708.

freo-dryhten (= frea-dryhten), st. m., _lord, ruler_; according to Grein,
dominus ingenuus vel nobilis: nom. sg. as voc. freo-drihten min! 1170; dat.
sg. mid his freo-dryhtne, 2628.

freogan, w. v., _to love; to think of lovingly_: pres. subj. þaet mon his
wine-dryhten ... ferhethum freoge, 3178; inf. nu ic þec ... me for sunu wylle
freogan on ferhethe, 949.

freo-lic, adj., _free, free-born_ (here of the lawful wife in contrast with
the bond concubine): nom. sg. freolic wif, 616; freolicu folc-cwen, 642.

freond, st. m., _friend_: acc. sg. freond, 1386, 1865; dat. pl. freondum,
916, 1019, 1127; gen. pl. freonda, 1307, 1839.

freond-laethu, st. f., _friendly invitation_: nom. sg. him waes ful boren and
freond-laethu (_friendly invitation to drink_) wordum bewaegned, 1193.

freond-lar, st. f., _friendly counsel_: dat. (instr.) pl. freond-larum,
2378.

freond-lice, adv., _in a friendly manner, kindly_: compar. freond-licor,
1028.

freond-scipe, st. m., _friendship_: acc. sg. freond-scipe faestne, 2070.

freo-wine, st. m. (see freawine), _lord and friend, friendly ruler_;
according to Grein, amicus nobilis, princeps amicus: nom. sg. as voc.
freo-wine folca! 430.

fricgean, w. v., _to ask, to inquire into_: inf. ongan sinne geseldan faegre
fricgean hwylce Sae-Geata siethas waeron, 1986; pres. part, gomela Scilding
fela fricgende feorran rehte, _the old Scilding, asking many questions_
(having many things related to him), _told of old times_ (the conversation
was alternate), 2107.

ge-fricgean, _to learn, to learn by inquiry_: pres. pl. syethethan hie
ge-fricgeaeth frean userne ealdorleasne, _when they learn that our lord is
dead_, 3003; pres. subj. gif ic þaet gefricge, þaet..., 1827; pl. syethethan
aeethelingas feorran gefricgean fleam eowerne, 2890.

friclan (see freca), w. v. w. gen., _to seek, to desire, to strive for_:
inf. naes þaer mara fyrst freode to friclan, 2557.

frietho-sib, st. f., _kin for the confirming of peace_, designation of the
queen (see freoetho--webbe), _peace-bringer_: nom. sg. friethu-sibb folca,
2018.

frignan, fringan, frinan, st. v., _to ask, to inquire_: imp. ne frin þu
aefter saelum, _ask not after the well-being!_ 1323; inf. ic þaes wine Deniga
frinan wille ... ymb þinne sieth, 351; pret. sg. fraegn, 236, 332; fraegn gif
..., _asked whether_ ..., 1320.

ge-frignan, ge-fringan, ge-frinan, _to find out by inquiry, to learn by
narration._ pret. sg. (w. acc.) þaet fram ham gefraegn Higelaces þegn
Grendles daeda, 194; no ic gefraegn heardran feohtan, 575; (w. acc. and inf.)
þa ic wide gefraegn weorc gebannan, 74; similarly, 2485, 2753, 2774; ne
gefraegen ic þa maegethe maran weorode ymb hyra sincgyfan sel gebaeran, _I never
heard that any people, richer in warriors, conducted itself better about
its chief_, 1012; similarly, 1028; pret. pl. (w. acc.) we þeodcyninga þrym
gefrunon, 2; (w. acc. and inf.) geongne guethcyning godne gefrunon hringas
daelan, 1970; (parenthetical) swa guman gefrungon, 667, (after þonne)
medo-aern micel (_greater_) ... þone yldo bearn aefre gefrunon, 70; pret.
part. haefde Higelaces hilde gefrunen, 2953; haefdon gefrunen þaet..., _had
learned that_ ..., 695; haefde gefrunen hwanan sio faeheth aras, 2404;
healsbeaga maest þara þe ic on foldan gefraegen haebbe, 1197.

from, See fram.

frod, adj.: 1) aetate provectus, _old, gray_: nom. sg. frod, 2626, 2951;
frod cyning, 1307, 2210; frod folces weard, 2514; wintrum frod, 1725, 2115,
2278; se froda, 2929; ac. sg. frode feorhlege (_the laying down of my old
life_), 2801; dat. sg. frodan fyrnwitan (may also, from its meaning, belong
under No. 2), 2124.--2) mente excellentior, _intelligent, experienced,
wise_: nom. sg. frod, 1367; frod and god, 279; on mode frod, 1845.--Comp.:
in-, un-frod.

frofor, st. f., _consolation, compensation, help_: nom. sg. frofor, 2942;
acc. sg. frofre, 7, 974; fyrena frofre, 629; frofre and fultum, 1274;
frofor and fultum, 699; dat. sg. to frofre, 14, 1708; gen. sg. frofre, 185.

fruma (see forma), w. m., _the foremost_, hence: l) _beginning_: nom. sg.
waes se fruma egeslic leodum on lande, swa hyt lungre weareth on hyra
sincgifan sare geendod (_the beginning of the dragon-combat was terrible,
its end distressing through the death of Beowulf_), 2310.--2) _he who
stands first, prince_; in comp. daed-, hild-, land-, leod-, ord-, wig-fruma.

frum-cyn, st. n., (genus primitivum), _descent, origin_: acc. sg. nu ic
eower sceal frumcyn witan, 252.

frum-gar, st. m., primipilus, _duke, prince_: dat. sg. frumgare (of
Beowulf), 2857.

frum-sceaft, st. f., prima creatio, _beginning_: acc. sg. se þe cuethe
frumsceaft fira feorran reccan, _who could tell of the beginning of mankind
in old times_, 91; dat. sg. frum-sceafte, _in the beginning_, i.e at his
birth, 45.

fugol, st. m., _bird_: dat. sg. fugle gelicost, 218; dat. pl. [fuglum] to
gamene, 2942.

ful, adj., _full, filled_: nom. sg. w. gen. pl. se waes innan full wraetta
and wira, 2413.--Comp.: eges-, sorh-, weoreth-ful.

ful, adv., plene, _very_: ful oft, 480; ful-oft, 952.

ful, st. n., _cup, beaker_: nom. sg., 1193; acc. sg. ful, 616, 629, 1026;
ofer yetha ful, _over the cup of the waves_ (the basin of the sea filled with
waves), 1209; dat. sg. onfoh þissum fulle, 1170.--Comp.: medo-, sele-full.

fullaestian, w. v. w. dat, _to give help_: pres. sg. ic þe fullaestu, 2669.

fultum, st. m., _help, support, protection_: acc. sg. frofor (frofre) and
fultum, 699, 1274; maegenes fultum, 1836; on fultum, 2663.--Comp.
maegen-fultum.

fundian, w. v., _to strive, to have in view_: pres. pl. we fundiaeth Higelac
secan, 1820; pret. sg. fundode of geardum, 1138.

furethum, adv., primo, _just, exactly; then first_: þa ic furethum weold folce
Deninga, _then first governed the people of the Danes_ (had just assumed
the government), 465; þa hie to sele furethum ... gangan cwomon, 323; ic þaer
furethum cwom to þam hringsele, 2010;--_before, previously_: ic þe sceal mine
gelaestan freode, swa wit furethum spraecon, 1708.

furethur, adv., _further, forward, more distant_, 254, 762, 3007.

fus, adj., _inclined to, favorable, ready_: nom. sg. nu ic eom siethes fus,
1476; leofra manna fus, _prepared for the dear men_, i.e. expecting them,
1917; sigel suethan fus, _the sun inclined from the south_ (midday sun),
1967; se wonna hrefn fus ofer faegum, _eager over the slain_, 3026; sceft
... feether-gearwum fus, 3120; nom. pl. waeron ... eft to leodum fuse to
farenne, 1806.--Sometimes fus means _ready for death_, moribundus: fus and
faege, 1242.--Comp.: hin-, ut-fus.

fus-lic, adj., _prepared, ready_: acc. sg. fus-lic f[yrd]-leoeth, 1425;
fyrd-searo fus-lic, 2619; acc. pl. fyrd-searu fus-licu, 232.

fyl, st. m., _fall_: nom. sg. fyll cyninges, _the fall of the king_ (in the
dragon-fight), 2913; dat. sg. þaet he on fylle weareth, _that he came to a
fall, fell_, 1545.--Comp. hra-fyl.

fylce (collective form from folc), st. n., _troop, band of warriors_: in
comp. ael-fylce.

ge-fyllan (see feal), w. v., _to fell, to slay in battle_: inf. fane
gefyllan, _to slay the enemy_, 2656; pret. pl. feond gefyldan, _they had
slain the enemy_, 2707.

a-fyllan (see ful), w. v., _to fill_: pret. part. Heorot innan waes freondum
afylled (_was filled with trusted men_), 1019.

fyllo, st. f. (_plenty, abundant meal_: dat. (instr.) sg. fylle gefraegnod,
1334; gen. sg. naes hie þaere fylle gefean haefdon, 562; fylle gefaegon,
1015.--Comp.: wael-, wist-fyllo.

fyl-werig, adj., _weary enough to fall, faint to death_, moribundus: acc.
sg. fyl-werigne, 963.

fyr. See feor.

fyrian, w. v. w. acc. (= ferian) _to bear, to bring, carry_: pret. pl. þa
þe gif-sceattas Geata fyredon þyder to þance, 378.

fyras. See firas.

fyren. See firen.

fyrde, adj., _movable, that can be moved_.--Comp. hard-fyrde.--Leo.

fyrd-gestealla, w. m., _comrade on an expedition, companion in battle_:
dat. pl. fyrd-gesteallum, 2874

fyrd-ham, st. m., _war-dress, coat of mail_: acc. sg. þone fyrd-hom, 1505.

fyrd-hraegl, st. n., _coat of mail, war-dress_: acc. sg. fyrd-hraegl, 1528.

fyrd-hwaet, adj., _sharp, good in war, warlike_: nom. pl. frome fyrd-hwate,
1642, 2477.

fyrd-leoeth, st. n., _war-song, warlike music_: acc. sg. horn stundum song
fuslic f[yrd]leoeth, 1425.

fyrd-searu, st. n., _equipment for an expedition_: acc. sg. fyrd-searu
fuslic, 2619; acc. pl. fyrd-searu fuslicu, 232.

fyrd-wyrethe, adj., _of worth in war, excellent in battle_: nom. sg.
fyrd-wyrethe man (Beowulf), 1317.

ge-fyrethran (see foreth), w. v., _to bring forward, to further_: pret. part.
ar waes on ofoste, eftsiethes georn, fraetwum gefyrethred, _he was hurried
forward by the treasure_ (i.e. after he had gathered up the treasure, he
hasted to return, so as to be able to show it to the mortally-wounded
Beowulf), 2785.

fyrmest. See forma.

fyrn-dagas, st. m. pl., _by-gone days_: dat. pl. fyrndagum (_in old
times_), 1452.

fyrn-geweorc, st. n., _work, something done in old times_: acc. sg. fira
fyrn-geweorc (the drinking-cup mentioned in 2283), 2287.

fyrn-gewin, st. n., _combat in ancient times_: gen. sg. or fyrn-gewinnes
(_the origin of the battles of the giants_), 1690.

fyrn-man, st. m., _man of ancient times_: gen. pl. fyrn-manna fatu, 2762.

fyrn-wita, w. m., _counsellor ever since ancient times, adviser for many
years_: dat. sg. frodan fyrnwitan, of Aeschere, 2124.

fyrst, st. m., _portion of time, definite time, time_: nom. sg. naes hit
lengra fyrst, ac ymb ane niht ..., 134; fyrst foreth gewat, _the time_ (of
going to the harbor) _was past_, 210; naes þaer mara fyrst freode to friclan,
2556; acc. sg. niht-longne fyrst, 528; fif nihta fyrst, 545; instr. sg. þy
fyrste, 2574; dat. sg. him on fyrste gelomp ..., _within the fixed time_,
76.

fyr-wit, -wet, -wyt, st. n., _prying spirit, curiosity_: nom. sg. fyrwyt,
232; fyrwet, 1986, 2785.

ge-fysan (fus), w. v., _to make ready, to prepare_: part. winde gefysed
flota, _the ship provided with wind_ (for the voyage), 217; (wyrm) fyre
gefysed, _provided with fire_, 2310; þa waes hringbogan (of the drake)
heorte gefysed saecce to seceanne, 2562; with gen., in answer to the
question, for what? guethe gefysed, _ready for battle, determined to fight_,
631.

fyr, st. n., _fire_: nom. sg., 1367, 2702, 2882; dat. sg. fyre, 2220; as
instr. fyre, 2275, 2596; gen. sg. fyres faeethm, 185; fyres feng, 1765.--
Comp.: ad-, bael-, heaethu-, wael-fyr.

fyr-bend, st. m., _band forged in fire_: dat. pl. duru ... fyr-bendum faest,
723.

fyr-draca, w. m., _fire-drake, fire-spewing dragon_: nom. sg., 2690.

fyr-heard, adj., _hard through fire, hardened in fire_: nom. pl. (eoforlic)
fah and fyr-heard, 305.

fyr-leoht, st. n., _fire-light_: acc. sg., 1517.

fyr-wylm, st. m., _wave of fire, flame-wave_: dat. pl. wyrm ... fyrwylmum
fah, 2672.


G

galan, st. v., _to sing, to sound_: pres. sg. sorh-leoeth gaeleeth, 2461; inf.
gryre-leoeth galan, 787; bearhtm ongeaton, guethhorn galan, _heard the clang,
the battle-trumpet sound_, 1433.

a-galan, _to sing, to sound_: pret. sg. þaet hire on hafelan hringmael agol
graedig guethleoeth, _that the sword caused a greedy battle-song to sound upon
her head_, 1522.

gamban, or, according to Bout., gambe, w. f., _tribute, interest_: acc. sg.
gomban gyldan, 11.

gamen, st. n., _social pleasure, rejoicing, joyous doings_: nom. sg. gamen,
1161; gomen, 2460; gomen gleobeames, _the pleasure of the harp_, 2264; acc.
sg. gamen and gleodream, 3022; dat. sg. gamene, 2942; gomene, 1776.--Comp.
heal-gamen.

gamen-waeth, st. f., _way offering social enjoyment, journey in joyous
society_: dat. sg. of gomen-waethe, 855.

gamen-wudu, st. m., _wood of social enjoyment_, i.e. harp: nom. sg. þaer waes
... gomenwudu greted, 1066; acc. sg. gomenwudu grette, 2109.

gamol, gomol, gomel, adj., _old_; of persons, _having lived many years,
gray_: gamol, 58, 265; gomol, 3096; gomel, 2113, 2794; se gomela, 1398;
gamela (gomela) Scylding, 1793, 2106; gomela, 2932; acc. sg. þone gomelan,
2422; dat. sg. gamelum rince, 1678; gomelum ceorle, 2445; þam gomelan,
2818; nom. pl. blondenfeaxe gomele, 1596.--Also, _late, belonging to former
time_: gen. pl. gomelra lafe (_legacy_), 2037.--Of things, _old, from old
times_: nom. sg. sweord ... gomol, 2683; acc. sg. gomele lafe, 2564; gomel
swyrd, 2611; gamol is a more respectful word than eald.

gamol-feax, adj., _with gray hair_: nom. sg., 609.

gang, st. m.: 1) _gait, way_: dat. sg. on gange, 1885; gen. sg. ic hine ne
mihte ... ganges ge-twaeman, _could not keep him from going_, 969.--2)
_step, foot-step_: nom. sg. gang (the foot-print of the mother of Grendel),
1405; acc. sg. uton hraethe feran Grendles magan gang sceawigan, 1392.--Comp.
in-gang.

be-gang, bi-gang, st. m., (_so far as something goes_), _extent_: acc. sg.
ofer geofenes begang, _over the extent of the sea_, 362; ofer floda begang,
1827; under swegles begong, 861, 1774; floda begong, 1498; sioleetha bigong,
2368.

gangan. See under gan.

ganot, st. m., _diver_, fulica marina: gen. sg. ofer ganotes baeeth (i.e. the
sea), 1862.

gad, st. n., _lack_: nom. sg. ne bieth þe wilna gad (_thou shalt have no lack
of desirable_ [valuable] _things_), 661; similarly, 950.

gan, _expanded =_ gangan, st. v., _to go_: pres. sg. III. gaeeth a Wyrd swa
hio scel, 455; gaeeth eft ... to medo, 605; þonne he ... on flett gaeeth, 2035;
similarly, 2055; pres. subj. III. sg. ga þaer he wille, _let him go whither
he will_, 1395; imp. sg. II. ga nu to setle, 1783; nu þu lungre geong, hord
sceawian, under harne stan, 2744; inf. in gan, _to go in_, 386, 1645 'foreth
gan, _to go forth, to go thither_, 1164; þat hie him to mihton gegnum
gangan, _to go towards, to go to_, 314; to sele ... gangan cwomon, 324; in
a similar construction, gongan, 1643; nu ge moton gangan ... Hroethgar
geseon, 395; þa com of more ... Grendel gongan, _there came Grendel (going)
from the fen_, 712; ongean gramum gangan, _to go to meet the enemy, to go
to the war_, 1035; cwom ... to hofe gongan, 1975; wutun gangan to, _let us
go thither_, 2649.--As preterite, serve, 1) geong or giong: he to healle
geong, 926; similarly, 2019; se þe on orde geong, _who went at the head,
went in front, _3126; on innan giong, _went in_, 2215; he ... giong to þaes
þe he eorethsele anne wisse, _went thither, where he knew of that earth-hall,
_2410; þa se aeetheling, giong, þaet he bi wealle gesaet, _then went the prince_
(Beowulf) _that he might sit down by the wall_, 2716.--2) gang: to healle
gang Healfdenes sunu, 1010; similarly, 1296; gang þa aefter flore, _went
along the floor, along the hall_, 1317.--3) gengde (Goth. gaggida): he ...
beforan gengde ..., wong sceawian, _went in front to inspect the fields_,
1413; gengde, also of riding, 1402.--4) from another stem, eode (Goth.
iddja): eode ellenrof, þaet he for eaxlum gestod Deniga frean, 358;
similarly, 403; [wieth duru healle Wulfgar eode], _went towards the door of
the hall_, 390; eode Wealhþeow foreth, _went forth_, 613; eode to hire frean
sittan, 641; eode yrremod, _went with angry feeling_, 727; eode ... to
sele, 919; similarly, 1233; eode ... þaer se snottra bad, 1313; eode weoreth
Denum aeetheling to yppan, _the prince_ (Beowulf), _honored by the Danes, went
to the high seat_, 1815; eode ... under inwit-hrof, 3124; pl. þaer
swiethferhethe sittan eodon, 493; eodon him þa togeanes, _went to meet him_,
1627; eodon under Earna naes, 3032.

a-gangan, _to go out, to go forth, to befall_: pret. part. swa bit agangen
weareth eorla manegum (_as it befell many a one of the earls_), 1235.

full-gangan, _to emulate, to follow after_: pret. sg. þonne ... sceft nytte
heold, feether-gearwum fus flane full-eode, _when the shaft had employment,
furnished with feathers it followed the arrow, did as the arrow_, 3120.

ge-gan, ge-gangan: 1) _to go, to approach_: inf. (w. acc.) his modor ...
gegan wolde sorhfulne sieth, 1278; se þe gryre-siethas gegan dorste, _who dared
to go the ways of terror_ (to go into the combat), 1463; pret. sg. se maga
geonga under his maeges scyld elne geeode, _went quickly under his kinsman's
shield_, 2677; pl. elne geeodon to þaes þe ..., _went quickly thither where_
..., 1968; pret. part. syethethan hie to-gaedre gegan haefdon, _when they_
(Wiglaf and the drake) _had come together_, 2631; þaet his aldres waes ende
gegongen, _that the end of his life had come_, 823; þa waes endedaeg godum
gegongen, þaet se guethcyning ... swealt, 3037.--2) _to obtain, to reach_:
inf. (w. acc.) þonne he aet guethe gegan þenceeth longsumne lof, 1536; ic mid
elne sceall gold gegangan, 2537; gerund, naes þaet yethe ceap to gegangenne
gumena aenigum, 2417; pret. pl. elne geeodon ... þaet se byrnwiga bugan
sceolde, 2918; pret. part. haefde ... gegongen þaet, _had attained it, that_
..., 894; hord ys gesceawod, grimme gegongen, 3086.--3) _to occur, to
happen_: pres. sg. III. gif þaet gegangeeth þaet ..., _if that happen, that_
..., 1847; pret. sg. þaet geiode ufaran dogrum hilde-hlaemmum, _it happened
in later times to the warriors_ (the Geatas), 2201; pret. part. þa waes
gegongen guman unfrodum earfoethlice þaet, _then it had happened to the young
man in sorrowful wise that_ ..., 2822.

oeth-gangan, _to-go thither_: pret. pl. oeth þaet hi oetheodon ... in Hrefnesholt,
2935.

ofer-gangan, w. acc., _to go over_: pret. sg. ofereode þa aeethelinga bearn
steap stan-hlietho, _went over steep, rocky precipices_, 1409; pl.
freoetho-wong þone foreth ofereodon, 2960.

ymb-gangan, w. acc., _to go around_: pret. ymb-eode þa ides Helminga duguethe
and geogoethe dael aeghwylcne, _went around in every part, among the superior
and the inferior warriors_, 621.

gar, st. m., _spear, javelin, missile_: nom. sg., 1847, 3022; instr. sg.
gare, 1076; blodigan gare, 2441; gen. sg. gares fliht, 1766; nom. pl.
garas, 328; gen. pl., 161(?).--Comp.: bon-, frum-gar.

gar-cene, adj., _spear-bold_: nom. sg., 1959.

gar-cwealm, st. m., _murder, death by the spear_: acc. sg. gar-cwealm
gumena, 2044.

gar-holt, st. n., _forest of spears_, i.e. crowd of spears: acc. sg., 1835.

gar-secg, st. m. (cf. Grimm, in Haupt l. 578), _sea, ocean_: acc. sg. on
gar-secg, 49, 537; ofer gar-secg, 515.

gar-wiga, w. m., _one who fights with the spear_: dat. sg. geongum
gar-wigan, of Wiglaf, 2675, 2812.

gar-wigend, pres. part., _fighting with spear, spear-fighter_: acc. pl.
gar-wigend, 2642.

gast, gaest, st. m., _ghost, demon_: acc. sg. helle gast (Grendel), 1275;
gen. sg. wergan gastes (of Grendel), 133; (of the tempter), 1748; gen. pl.
dyrnra gasta (Grendel's race), 1358; gaesta gifrost (_flames consuming
corpses_), 1124.--Comp.: ellor-, geo-sceaft-gast; ellen-, wael-gaest.

gast-bana, w. m., _slayer of the spirit_, i.e. the devil: nom. sg.
gast-bona, 177.

gaedeling, st. m., _he who is connected with another, relation, companion_:
gen. sg. gaedelinges, 2618; dat. pl. mid his gaedelingum, 2950.

aet-gaedere, adv., _together, united_: 321, 1165, 1191; samod aetgaedere, 329,
387, 730, 1064.

to-gadere, adv., _together_, 2631.

gaest, gist, gyst, st. m., _stranger, guest_: nom. sg. gaest, 1801; se gaest
(the drake), 2313; se grimma gaest (Grendel), 102; gist, 1139, 1523; acc.
sg. gryre-licne gist (the nixy slain by Beowulf), 1442; dat. sg. gyste,
2229; nom. pl. gistas, 1603; acc. pl. gaes[tas], 1894.--Comp.: feethe-,
gryre-, inwit-, nieth-, sele-gaest (-gyst).

gaest-sele, st. m., _hall in which the guests spend their time, guest-hall_:
acc. sg., 995.

ge, conj., _and_, 1341; ge ... ge ..., _as well ... as ..._, 1865; ge ...
ge ..., ge ..., 1249; ge swylce, _and likewise, and moreover_, 2259.

ge, pron., _ye, you_, plur. of þu, 237, 245, etc.

gegn-cwide, st. m., _reply_: gen. pl. þinra gegn-cwida, 367.

gegnum, adv., _thither, towards, away_, with the prep, to, ofer, giving the
direction: þaet hie him to mihton gegnum gangan (_that they might go
thither_), 314; gegnum for [þa] ofer myrcan mor, _away over the dark moor_,
1405.

gehethu, geohethu, st. f., _sorrow, care_: instr. sg. giohetho maende, 2268; dat.
sg. on gehetho, 3096; on giohethe, 2794.

gen (from gegn), adv., _yet, again_. ne waes hit lenge þa gen, þaet ..., _it
was not then long before_ ..., 83; ic sceal foreth sprecan gen ymb Grendel,
_shall from now on speak again of Grendel_, 2071; no þy aer ut þa gen ...
gongan wolde (_still he would not yet go out_), 2082; gen is eall aet þe
lissa gelong (_yet all my favor belongs to thee_), 2150; þa gen, _then
again_, 2678, 2703; swa he nu gen deeth, _as he still does_, 2860; furethur
gen, _further still, besides_, 3007; nu gen, _now again_, 3169; ne gen, _no
more, no farther_: ne waes þaet wyrd þa gen, _that was no more fate_ (fate no
longer willed that), 735.

gena, _still_: cwico waes þa gena, _was still living_, 3094.

genga, w. m., _goer_; in comp. in-, sae-, sceadu-genga.

gengde. See gan(3).

genge. See ueth-genge.

genunga (from gegnunga), adv., _precisely, completely_, 2872.

gerwan, gyrwan, w. v.: 1) _to prepare, to make ready, to put in condition_:
pret. pl. gestsele gyredon, 995.--2) _to equip, to arm for battle_: pret.
sg. gyrede hine Beowulf eorl-gewaedum (_dressed himself in the armor_),
1442.

ge-gyrwan: 1) _to make, to prepare_: pret. pl. him þa gegiredan Geata leode
ad ... unwaclicne, 3138; pret. part. glof ... eall gegyrwed deofles craeftum
and dracan fellum, 2088.--2) _to fit out, to make ready_: inf. ceol
gegyrwan hilde-waepnum and heaethowaedum, 38; het him yethlidan godne gegyrwan,
_had (his) good ship fitted up for him_, 199. Also, _to provide warlike
equipment_: pret. part. syethethan he hine to guethe gegyred haefde, 1473.--3) _to
endow, to provide, to adorn_: pret. part. nom. sg. beado-hraegl ... golde
gegyrwed, 553; acc. sg. lafe ... golde gegyrede, 2193; acc. pl. madmas ...
golde gegyrede, 1029.

getan, w. v., _to injure, to slay_: inf., 2941.

be-gete, adj., _attainable_; in comp. eeth-begete.

geador, adv., _unitedly, together, jointly_, 836; geador aetsomne, 491.

on-geador, adv., _unitedly, together_, 1596.

gealdor, st. n.: 1) _sound_: acc. sg. byman gealdor, 2944.--2) _magic song,
incantation, spell_: instr. sg. þonne waes þaet yrfe ... galdre bewunden
(_placed under a spell_), 3053.

gealga, w. m., _gallows_: dat. sg. þaet his byre ride giong on galgan, 2447.

gealg-mod, adj., _gloomy_: nom. sg. gifre and galgmod, 1278.

gealg-treow, st. n., _gallows_: dat. pl. on galg-treowu[m], 2941.

geard, st. m., _residence_; in Beowulf corresponding to the house-complex
of a prince's residence, used only in the plur.: acc. in geardas (_in
Finn's castle_), 1135; dat. in geardum, 13, 2460; of geardum, 1139; aer he
on weg hwurfe ... of geardum, _before he went away from his
dwelling-place_, i.e. died, 265.--Comp. middan-geard.

gearo, adj., properly, _made, prepared_; hence, _ready, finished,
equipped_: nom. sg. þaet hit weareth eal gearo, heal-aerna maest, 77; wiht
unhaelo ... gearo sona waes, _the demon of destruction was quickly ready, did
not delay long_, 121; Here-Scyldinga betst beadorinca waes on bael gearu,
_was ready for the funeral-pile_ (for the solemn burning), 1110; þeod (is)
eal gearo, _the warriors are altogether ready, always prepared_, 1231;
hraethe waes aet holme hyeth-weard gearo (geara, MS.), 1915; gearo gueth-freca,
2415; sie sio baer gearo aedre geaefned, _let the bier be made ready at once_,
3106. With gen.: gearo gyrnwraece, _ready for revenge for harm done_, 2119,
acc. sg. gearwe stowe, 1007; nom. pl. beornas gearwe, 211; similarly, 1814.

gearwe, gearo, geare, adv., _completely, entirely_: ne ge ... gearwe ne
wisson, _you do not know at all_ ..., 246; similarly, 879; hine gearwe
geman witena welhwyle (_remembers him very well_), 265; wisse he gearwe þaet
..., _he knew very well that_ ..., 2340, 2726; þaet ic ... gearo sceawige
swegle searogimmas (_that I may see the treasures altogether, as many as
they are_), 2749; ic wat geare þaet ..., 2657.--Comp. gearwor, _more
readily, rather_, 3077.--Superl. gearwost, 716.

gearo-folm, adj., _with ready hand_, 2086.

gearwe, st. f., _equipment, dress_; in comp. feether-gearwe.

geat, st. n., _opening, door_; in comp. ben-, hilde-geat.

geato-lic, adj., _well prepared, handsome, splendid_: of sword and armor,
215, 1563, 2155; of Heorot, 308. Adv.: wisa fengel geatolic gengde, _passed
on in a stately manner_, 1402.

geatwe, st. f. pl., _equipment, adornment_: acc. recedes geatwa, _the
ornaments of the dragon's cave_ (its treasures), 3089.--Comp.: eored-,
gryre-, gueth-, hilde-, wig-geatwe.

gean (from gegn), adv. in

on-gean, adv. and prep., _against, towards_: þaet he me ongean slea, 682;
raehte ongean feond mid folme, 748; foran ongean, _forward towards_, 2365.
With dat.: ongean gramum, _against the enemy_, 1035.

to-geanes, to-genes, prep, _against, towards_: Grendle togeanes, _towards
Grendel, against Grendel_, 667; grap þa togeanes, _she grasped at_
(Beowulf), 1502; similarly, him togeanes feng, 1543; eodon him þa togeanes,
_went towards him_, 1627; het þa gebeodan ... þaet hie bael-wudu feorran
feredon godum togenes, _had it ordered that they should bring the wood from
far for the funeral-pyre towards the good man_ (i.e. to the place where the
dead Beowulf lay), 3115.

geap, adj., _roomy, extensive, wide_: nom. sg. reced ... geap, _the roomy
hall_, 1801; acc. sg. under geapne hrof, 837.--Comp.: horn-, sae-geap.

gear, st. n., _year_: nom. sg., 1135; gen. pl. geara, in adverbial sense,
olim, _in former times_, 2665. See un-geara.

gear-dagas, st. m. pl., _former days_: dat. pl. in (on) gear-dagum, 1,
1355.

geofe. See gifu.

geofon, gifen, gyfen (see Kuhn Zeitschr. I. 137), st. n., _sea, flood_:
nom. sg. geofon, 515; gifen geotende, _the streaming flood_, 1691; gen. sg.
geofenes begang, 362; gyfenes, 1395.

geogoeth, st. f.: 1) _youth, time of youth_: dat. sg. on geogoethe, 409, 466,
2513; on giogoethe, 2427; gen. gioguethe, 2113.--2) contrasted with dugueth, _the
younger warriors of lower rank_ (about as in the Middle Ages, the squires
with the knights): nom. sg. geogoeth, 66; giogoeth, 1191; acc. sg. geogoethe,
1182; gen. duguethe and geogoethe, 160; duguethe and iogoethe (geogoethe), 1675, 622.

geogueth-feorh, st. n., _age of youth_, i.e. age in which one still belongs
in the ranks of the geogoeth: on geogoeth- (geogueth-) feore, 537, 2665.

geohetho. See gehetho.

geolo, adj., _yellow_: acc. sg. geolwe linde (_the shield of yellow linden
bark_), 2611.

geolo-rand, st. m., _yellow shield_ (shield with a covering of interlaced
yellow linden bark): acc. sg., 438.

geond, prep. w. acc., _through, throughout, along, over_: geond þisne
middangeard, _through the earth, over the earth_, 75; wide geond eorethan,
266, 3100; ferdon folctogan ... geond wid-wegas, _went along the ways
coming from afar_, 841; similarly, 1705; geond þaet saeld, _through the hall,
through the extent of the hall_, 1281; similarly, 1982, 2265.

geong, adj., _young, youthful_: nom. sg., 13, 20, 855, etc.; giong, 2447;
w. m. se maga geonga, 2676; acc. sg. geongne guethcyning, 1970; dat. sg.
geongum, 1949, 2045, 2675, etc.; on swa geongum feore, _at a so youthful
age_, 1844; geongan cempan, 2627; acc. pl. geonge, 2019; dat. pl. geongum
and ealdum, 72.--Superl. gingest, _the last_: nom. sg. w. f. gingeste word,
2818.

georn, adj., _striving, eager_, w. gen. of the thing striven for: eft siethes
georn, 2784.--Comp. lof-georn.

georne, adv., _readily, willingly_: þaet him wine-magas georne hyrdon, 66;
georne truwode, 670.--_zealously, eagerly_: sohte georne aefter grunde,
_eagerly searched over the ground_, 2295.--_carefully, industriously_: no
ic him þaes georne aetfealh (_held him not fast enough_), 969.--_completely,
exactly_: comp. wiste þe geornor, 822.

geo, iu, adv., _once, formerly, earlier_, 1477; gio, 2522; iu, 2460.

geoc, st. f., _help, support_: acc. sg. geoce gefremman, 2675; þaet him
gast-bona geoce gefremede wieth þeod-þreaum, 177; geoce gelyfde, _believed in
the help_ (of Beowulf), 609; dat. sg. to geoce, 1835.

geocor, adj., _ill, bad_: nom. sg., 766.--See Haupt's Zeitschrift 8, p. 7.

geo-man, iu-man, st. m., _man of former times_: gen. pl. iu-manna, 3053.

geo-meowle, w. f., (_formerly a virgin), wife_: acc. sg. io-meowlan, 2932.

geomor, adj., _with depressed feelings, sad, troubled_: nom. sg. him waes
geomor sefa, 49, 2420, 2633, 2951; modes geomor, 2101; fem. þaet waes geomuru
ides, 1076.

geomore, adv., _sadly_, 151.

geomor-gid, st. n., _dirge_: acc. sg. giomor-gyd, 3151.

geomor-lic, adj., _sad, painful_: swa bieth geomorlic gomelum ceorle to
gebidanne þaet..., _it is painful to an old man to experience it, that ..._,
2445.

geomor-mod, adj., _sad, sorrowful_: nom. sg., 2045, 3019; giomor-mod, 2268.

geomrian, w. v., _to complain, to lament_: pret. sg. geomrode giddum, 1119.

geo-sceaft, st. f., (_fixed in past times), fate_: acc. sg. geosceaft
grimme, 1235.

geosceaft-gast, st. m., _demon sent by fate_: gen. pl. fela
geosceaft-gasta, of Grendel and his race, 1267.

geotan, st. v. intrans., _to pour, to flow, to stream_: pres. part. gifen
geotende, 1691.

gicel, st. m., _icicle_: in comp. hilde-gicel.

gid, gyd, st. n., _speech, solemn alliterative song_: nom. sg. þaer waes ...
gid oft wrecen, 1066; leoeth waes asungen, gleomannes gyd, _the song was sung,
the gleeman's lay_, 1161; þaer waes gidd and gleo, 2106; acc. sg. ic þis gid
awraec, 1724; gyd awraec, 2109; gyd aefter wraec, 2155; þonne he gyd wrece,
2447; dat. pl. giddum, 151, 1119; gen. pl. gidda gemyndig, 869.--Comp.:
geomor-, word-gid.

giddian, w. v., _to speak, to speak in alliteration_: pret. gyddode, 631.

gif, conj.: 1) _if_, w. ind., 442, 447, 527, 662, etc.; gyf, 945, etc. With
subj., 452, 594, 1482, etc.; gyf, 280, 1105, etc.--2) _whether_, w. ind.,
272; w. subj., 1141, 1320.

gifa, geofa, w. m., _giver_; in comp. gold-, sinc-, wil-gifa (-geofa).

gifan, st. v., _to give_: inf. giofan, 2973; pret. sg. nallas beagas geaf
Denum, 1720; he me [maethmas] geaf, 2147; and similarly, 2174, 2432, 2624,
etc.; pret. pl. geafon (hyne) on garsecg, 49; pret. part. þa waes Hroethgare
here-sped gyfen, 64; þa waes gylden hilt gamelum rince ... on hand gyfen,
1679; syethethan aerest weareth gyfen ... geongum cempan (_given in marriage_),
1949.

a-gifan, _to give, to impart_: inf. andsware ... agifan, _to give an
answer_, 355; pret. sg. sona him se froda faeder Ohtheres ... ondslyht ageaf
(_gave him a counter-blow_), (_hand-blow_?), 2930.

for-gyfan, _to give, to grant_: pret. sg. him þaes lif-frea ... worold-are
forgeaf, 17; þaem to ham forgeaf Hreethel Geata angan dohtor (_gave in
marriage_), 374; similarly, 2998; he me lond forgeaf, _granted me land_,
2493; similarly, 697, 1021, 2607, 2617; maegen-raes forgeaf hilde-bille, _he
gave with his battle-sword a mighty blow_, i.e. he struck with full force,
1520.

of-gifan, (_to give up_), _to leave_: inf. þaet se maera maga Ecgþeowes
grund-wong þone ofgyfan wolde (_was fated to leave the earth-plain_), 2589;
pret. sg. þas worold ofgeaf gromheort guma, 1682; similarly, gumdream
ofgeaf, 2470; Dena land ofgeaf, 1905; pret. pl. naes ofgeafon hwate
Scyldingas, _left the promontory_, 1601; þaet þa hildlatan holt ofgefan,
_that the cowards left the wood_ (into which they had fled), 2847; sg.
pret. for pl. þara þe þis [lif] ofgeaf, 2252.

gifeethe, adj., _given, granted_: Guethfremmendra swylcum gifeethe bieth þaet...,
_to such a warrior is it granted that_..., 299; similarly, 2682; swa me
gifeethe waes, 2492; þaer me gifeethe swa aenig yrfeweard aefter wurde, _if an
heir_, (living) _after me, had been given me_, 2731.--Neut. as subst.: waes
þaet gifeethe to swieth, þe þone [þeoden] þyder ontyhte, _the fate was too harsh
that has drawn hither the king_, 3086; gyfeethe, 555, 820.--Comp. un-gifeethe.

gif-heal, st. f., _hall in which fiefs were bestowed, throne-hall_: acc.
sg. ymb þa gifhealle, 839.

gif-sceat, st. m., _gift of value_: acc. pl. gif-sceattas, 378.

gif-stol, st. m., _seat from which fiefs are granted, throne_: nom. sg.,
2328; acc. sg., 168.

gift, st. f., _gift, present_: in comp. feoh-gift.

gifu, geofu, st. f., _gift, present, grant; fief_: nom. sg. gifu, 1885 acc.
sg. gimfaeste gife þe him god sealde, _the great gift that God had granted
him_ (i.e. the enormous strength), 1272; ginfaestan gife þe him god sealde,
2183; dat. pl. (as instr.) geofum, 1959; gen. pl. gifa, 1931; geofena,
1174.--Comp.: maethethum-, sinc-gifu.

gigant, st. m., _giant_: nom. pl. gigantas, 113; gen. pl. giganta, 1563,
1691.

gild, gyld, st. n., _reparation_: in comp. wiether-gyld(?).

gildan, gyldan, st. v., _to do something in return, to repay, to reward, to
pay_: inf. gomban gyldan, _pay tribute_, 11; he mid gode gyldan wille
uncran eaferan, 1185; we him þa guethgeatwa gyldan woldon, 2637; pret. sg.
heaethoraesas geald mearum and maethmum, _repaid the battles with horses and
treasures_, 1048; similarly, 2492; geald þone guethraes ... Jofore and Wulfe
mid ofermaethmum, _repaid Eofor and Wulf the battle with exceedingly great
treasures_, 2992.

an-gildan, _to pay for_: pret. sg. sum sare angeald aefenraeste, _one_
(Aeschere) _paid for the evening-rest with death's pain_, 1252.

a-gildan, _to offer one's self_: pret. sg. þa me sael ageald, _when the
favorable opportunity offered itself_, 1666; similarly, þa him rum ageald,
2691.

for-gildan, _to repay, to do something in return, to reward_: pres. subj.
sg. III. alwalda þec gode forgylde, _may the ruler of all reward thee with
good_, 957; inf. þone aenne heht golde forgyldan, _he ordered that the one_
(killed by Grendel) _be paid for_ (atoned for) _with gold_, 1055; he ...
wolde Grendle for-gyldan guethraesa fela, _wished to pay Grendel for many
attacks_, 1578; wolde se laetha lige forgyldan drinc-faet dyre, _the enemy
wished to repay with fire the costly drinking vessel_ (the theft of it),
2306; pret. sg. he him þaes lean forgeald, _he gave them the reward
therefore_, 114; similarly, 1542, 1585, 2095; forgeald hraethe wyrsan wrixle
waelhlem þone, _repaid the murderous blow with a worse exchange_, 2969.

gilp, gylp, st. m., _speech in which one promises great things for himself
in a coming combat, defiant speech, boasting speech_: acc. sg. haefde ...
Geat-mecga leod gilp gelaested (_had fulfilled what he had claimed for
himself before the battle_), 830; nallas on gylp seleeth faette beagas, _gives
no chased gold rings for a boastful speech_, 1750; þaet ic wieth þone
guethflogan gylp ofersitte, _restrain myself from the speech of defiance_,
2529; dat. sg. gylpe wiethgripan (_fulfil my promise of battle_),
2522.--Comp. dol-gilp.

gilpan, gylpan, st. v. w. gen., acc., and dat., _to make a defiant speech,
to boast, to exult insolently_: pres. sg. I. no ic þaes gilpe (after a break
in the text), 587; sg. III. morethres gylpeeth, _boasts of the murder_, 2056;
inf. swa ne gylpan þearf Grendles maga aenig ... uhthlem þone, 2007; nealles
folc-cyning fyrdgesteallum gylpan þorfte, _had no need to boast of his
fellow-warrior_, 2875; pret. sg. hreethsigora ne gealp goldwine Geata, _did
not exult at the glorious victory_ (could not gain the victory over the
drake), 2584.

gilp-cwide, st. m., _speech in which a man promises much for himself for a
coming combat, speech of defiance_: nom. sg., 641.

gilp-hlaeden, pret. part., _laden with boasts of defiance_ (i.e. he who has
made many such boasts, and consequently has been victorious in many
combats), _covered with glory_: nom. sg. guma gilp-hlaeden, 869.

gilp-spraec, same as gilp-cwide, _speech of defiance, boastful speech_: dat.
sg. on gylp-spraece, 982.

gilp-word, st. n., _defiant word before the coming combat, vaunting word_:
gen. pl. gespraec ... gylp-worda sum, 676.

gim, st. m., _gem, precious stone, jewel_: nom. sg. heofones gim, _heaven's
jewel_, i.e. the sun, 2073. Comp. searo-gim.

gimme-rice, adj., _rich in jewels_: acc. sg. gimme-rice hord-burh haeleetha,
466.

gin (according to Bout., ginne), adj., properly _gaping_, hence, _wide,
extended_: acc. sg. gynne grund (_the bottom of the sea_), 1552.

gin-faest, adj., _extensive, rich_: acc. sg. gim-faeste gife (gim-, on
account of the following _f_), 1272; in weak form, gin-faestan gife, 2183.

ginnan, st. v., original meaning, _to be open, ready_; in

on-ginnan, _to begin, to undertake_: pret. oeth þaet an ongan fyrene fremman
feond on helle, 100; secg eft ongan sieth Beowulfes snyttrum styrian, 872; þa
þaet sweord ongan ... wanian, _the sword began to diminish_, 1606; Higelac
ongan sinne geseldan ... faegre fricgean, _began with propriety to question
his companion_, 1984, etc.; ongon, 2791; pret. pl. no her cuethlicor cuman
ongunnon lindhaebbende, _no shield-bearing men e'er undertook more openly to
come hither_, 244; pret. part. haebbe ic maeretha fela ongunnen on geogoethe,
_have in my youth undertaken many deeds of renown_, 409.

gist. See gaest.

gistran, adv., _yesterday_: gystran niht, _yesterday night_, 1335.

git, pron., _ye two_, dual of þu, 508, 512, 513, etc.

git, gyt, adv., _yet; then still_, 536, 1128, 1165, 2142; _hitherto_, 957;
naefre git, _never yet_, 583; _still_, 945, 1059, 1135; _once more_, 2513;
_moreover_, 47, 1051, 1867.

gitan (original meaning, _to take hold of, to seize, to attain_), in

be-gitan, w. acc., _to grasp, to seize, to reach_: pret. sg. begeat, 1147,
2231; þa hine wig beget, _when war seized him, came upon him_, 2873;
similarly, begeat, 1069; pret. pl. hit aer on þe gode be-geaton, _good men
received it formerly from thee_, 2250; subj. sg. for pl. þaet waes Hroethgare
hreowa tornost þara þe leodfruman lange begeate, _the bitterest of the
troubles that for a long time had befallen the people's chief_, 2131.

for-gitan, w. acc., _to forget_: pres. sg. III. he þa forethgesceaft forgyteeth
and forgymeeth, 1752.

an-gitan, on-gitan, w. acc.: 1) _to take hold of, to grasp_: imp. sg.
gumcyste ongit, _lay hold of manly virtue, of what becomes the man_, 1724;
pret. sg. þe hine se broga angeat, _whom terror seized_, 1292.--2) _to
grasp intellectually, to comprehend, to perceive, to distinguish, to
behold_: pres. subj. I. þaet ic aerwelan ... ongite, _that I may behold the
ancient wealth_ (the treasures of the drake's cave), 2749; inf. sael timbred
... ongytan, 308, 1497; Geata clifu ongitan, 1912; pret. sg. fyren-þearfe
ongeat, _had perceived their distress from hostile snares_, 14; ongeat ...
grund-wyrgenne, _beheld the she-wolf of the bottom_, 1519; pret. pl.
bearhtm ongeaton, guethhorn galan, _perceived the noise_, (heard) _the
battle-trumpet sound_, 1432; syethethan hie Hygelaces horn and byman gealdor
ongeaton, 2945.

gifre, adj., _greedy, eager_: nom. sg. gifre and galgmod, of Grendel's
mother, 1278.--Superl.: lig..., gaesta gifrost, 1124.--Comp. heoro-gifre.

gitsian, w. v., _to be greedy_: pres. sg. III. gytsaeth, 1750.

gio-, gio-. See geo-, geo-.

gladian, w. v., _to gleam, to shimmer_: pres. pl. III. on him gladiaeth
gomelra lafe, _upon him gleams the legacy of the men of ancient times_
(armor), 2037.

glaed, adj., _gracious, friendly_ (as a form of address for princes): nom.
sg. beo wieth Geatas glaed, 1174; acc. sg. glaedne Hroethgar, 864; glaedne
Hroethulf, 1182; dat. sg. gladum suna Frodan, 2026.

glaede, adv., _in a gracious, friendly way_, 58.

glaednian, w. v., _to rejoice_: inf. w. gen., 367.

glaed-mod, adj., _joyous, glad_, 1786.

gled, st. f., _fire, flame_: nom. sg., 2653, 3115; dat. (instr.) pl.
gledum, 2313, 2336, 2678, 3042.

gled-egesa, w. m., _terror on account of fire, fire-terror_: nom. sg.
gled-egesa grim (_the fire-spewing of the drake_), 2651.

gleaw (Goth, glaggwu-s), adj., _considerate, well-bred_, of social conduct;
in comp. un-gleaw.

gleo, st. n., _social entertainment_, (especially by music, play, and
jest): nom. sg. þaer waes gidd and gleo, 2106.

gleo-beam, st. m., _(tree of social entertainment, of music), harp._ gen.
sg. gleo-beames, 2264.

gleo-dream, st. _m., joyous carrying-on in social entertainment, mirth,
social gaiety_: acc. sg. gamen and gleo-dream, 3022.

gleo-man, m., _(gleeman, who enlivens the social entertainment, especially
with music), harper_: gen. sg. gleomannes gyd, 1161.

glitinian (O.H.G. glizinon), w. v., _to gleam, to light, to glitter_: inf.
geseah þa ... gold glitinian, 2759.

glidan, st. v., _to glide_: pret. sg. syethethan heofones gim glad ofer
grundas, _after heaven's gem had glided over the fields_ (after the sun had
set), 2074; pret. pl. glidon ofer garsecg, _you glided over the ocean_
(swimming), 515.

to-glidan _(to glide asunder), to separate, to fall asunder_: pret.
gueth-helm to-glad (Ongenþeow's helmet was split asunder by the blow of
Eofor), 2488.

glof, st. f., _glove_: nom. sg. glof hangode, (on Grendel) _a glove hung_,
2086.

gneaeth, adj., _niggardly_: nom. sg. f. naes hio ... to gneaeth gifa Geata
leodum, _was not too niggardly with gifts to the people of the Geatas_,
1931.

gnorn, st. m., _sorrow, sadness_: acc. sg. gnorn þrowian, 2659.

gnornian, w. v., _to be sad, to complain_: pret. sg. earme ... ides
gnornode, 1118.

be-gnornian, w. acc., _to bemoan, to mourn for_: pret. pl. begnornodon ...
hlafordes [hry]re, _bemoaned their lord's fall_, 3180.

god, st. m., _god_: nom. sg., 13, 72, 478, etc.; halig god, 381, 1554;
witig god, 686; mihtig god, 702; acc. sg. god, 812; ne wiston hie drihten
god, _did not know the Lord God_, 181; dat. sg. gode, 113, 227, 626, etc.;
gen. sg. godes, 570, 712, 787, etc.

gold, st. n., _gold_: nom. sg., 3013, 3053; icge gold, 1108; wunden gold,
_wound gold, gold in ring-form_, 1194, 3136; acc. sg. gold, 2537, 2759,
2794, 3169; haeethen gold, _heathen gold_ (that from the drake's cave), 2277;
brad gold, _massive gold_, 3106; dat. instr. sg. golde, 1055, 2932, 3019;
faettan golde, _with chased gold, with gold in plate-form_, 2103; gehroden
golde, _covered with gold, gilded_, 304; golde gegyrwed (gegyrede),
_provided with, ornamented with gold_, 553, 1029, 2193; golde geregnad,
_adorned with gold_, 778; golde fahne (hrof), _the roof shining with gold_,
928; bunden golde, _bound with gold_ (see under bindan), 1901; hyrsted
golde (helm), _the helmet ornamented with, mounted with gold_, 2256; gen.
sg. goldes, 2302; faettan goldes, 1094, 2247; sciran goldes, _of pure gold_,
1695. --Comp. faet-gold.

gold-aeht, st. f., _possessions in gold, treasure_: acc. sg., 2749.

gold-fah, adj., _variegated with gold, shining with gold_: nom. sg. reced
... gold-fah, 1801; acc. sg. gold-fahne helm, 2812; nom. pl. gold-fag
scinon web aefter wagum, _variegated with gold, the tapestry gleamed along
the walls_, 995.

gold-gifa, w. m., _gold-giver_, designation of the prince: acc. sg. mid
minne goldgyfan, 2653.

gold-hroden, pret. part., _(covered with gold), ornamented with gold_: nom.
sg., 615, 641, 1949, 2026; epithet of women of princely rank.

gold-hwaet, adj., _striving after gold, greedy for gold_: naes he goldhwaet,
_he_ (Beowulf) _was not greedy for gold_ (he did not fight against the
drake for his treasure, cf. 3067 ff.) 3075.

gold-maethm, st. m., _jewel of gold_: acc. pl. gold-maethmas (the treasures of
the drake's cave), 2415.

gold-sele, st. m., _gold-hall_, i.e. the hall in which the gold was
distributed, ruler's hall: acc. sg., 716, 1254; dat. sg. gold-sele, 1640,
2084.

gold-weard, st. m., _gold-ward, defender of the gold_: acc. sg. (of the
drake), 3082.

gold-wine, st. m., _friend who distributes gold_, i.e. ruler, prince: nom.
sg. (partly as voc.) goldwine gumena, 1172, 1477, 1603; goldwine Geata,
2420, 2585.

gold-wlanc, adj., _proud of gold_: nom. sg. guethrinc goldwlanc (Beowulf
rewarded with gold by Hroethgar on account of his victory), 1882.

gomban, gomel, gomen. See gamban, gamal, gamen.

gong, gongan. See gang, gangan.

god, adj., _good, fit_, of persons and things: nom. sg., 11, 195, 864,
2264, 2391, etc.; frod and god, 279; w. dat. cyning aeethelum god, _the king
noble in birth_, 1871; gumcystum god, 2544; w. gen. wes þu us larena god,
_be good to us with teaching_ (help us thereto through thy instruction),
269; in weak form, se goda, 205, 355, 676, 1191, etc.; acc. sg. godne, 199,
347, 1596, 1970, etc.; gumcystum godne, 1487; neut. god, 1563; dat. sg.
godum, 3037, 3115; þaem godan, 384, 2328; nom. pl. gode, 2250; þa godan,
1164; acc. pl. gode, 2642; dat. pl. godum daedum, 2179; gen. pl. godra
guethrinca, 2649.--Comp. aer-god.

god, st. n.: 1) _good that is done, benefit, gift_: instr. sg. gode, 20,
957, 1185; gode maere, _renowned on account of her gifts_ (Þryetho), 1953;
instr. pl. godum, 1862.--2) _ability_, especially in fight: gen. pl. nat he
þara goda, 682.

gram, adj., _hostile_: gen. sg. on grames grapum, _in the gripe of the
enemy_ (Beowulf), 766; nom. pl. þa graman, 778; dat. pl. gramum, 424, 1035.

gram-heort, adj., _of a hostile heart, hostile_: nom. sg. grom-heort guma,
1683.

gram-hydig, adj., _with hostile feeling, maliciously inclined_: nom. sg.
gromhydig, 1750.

grap, st. f., _the hand ready to grasp, hand, claw_: dat. sg. mid grape,
438; on grape, 555; gen. sg. eal ... Grendles grape, _all of Grendel's
claw, the whole claw_, 837; dat. pl. on grames grapum, 766; (as instr.)
grimman grapum, _with grim claws_, 1543.--Comp.: feond-, hilde-grap.

grapian, w. v., _to grasp, to lay hold of, to seize_: pret. sg. þaet hire
wieth halse heard grapode, _that_ (the sword) _griped hard at her neck_,
1567; he ... grapode gearofolm, _he took hold with ready hand_, 2086.

graes-molde, w. f., _grass-plot_: acc. sg. graesmoldan traed, _went over the
grass-plot_, 1882.

graedig, adj., _greedy, hungry, voracious_: nom. sg. grim and graedig, 121,
1500; acc. sg. graedig guethleoeth, 1523.

graeg, adj., _gray_: nom. pl. aesc-holt ufan graeg, _the ashen wood, gray
above_ (the spears with iron points) 330; acc. pl. graege syrcan, _gray_
(i.e. iron) _shirts of mail_, 334.

graeg-mael, adj., _having a gray color_, here = _iron_: nom. sg. sweord
Beowulfes gomol and graegmael, 2683.

graepe. See aet-graepe.

gretan, w. v. w. acc.: 1) _to greet, to salute_: inf. hine swa godne
gretan, 347; Hroethgar gretan, 1647, 2011; eowic gretan het (_bade me bring
you his last greeting_), 3096; pret. sg. grette Geata leod, 626; grette þa
guma oetherne, 653; Hroethgar grette, 1817.-- 2) _to come on, to come near, to
seek out; to touch; to take hold of_: inf. gifstol gretan, _take possession
of the throne, mount it as ruler_, 168; naes se folccyning aenig ... þe mec
guethwinum gretan dorste (_attack with swords_), 2736; Wyrd ... se þone
gomelan gretan sceolde, 2422; þaet þone sin-scaethan guethbilla nan gretan
nolde, _that no sword would take hold upon the irreconcilable enemy_, 804;
pret. sg. grette goldhroden guman on healle, _the gold-adorned_ (queen)
_greeted the men in the hall_, 615; no he mid hearme ... gaestas grette,
_did not approach the strangers with insults_, 1894; gomenwudu grette,
_touched the wood of joy, played the harp_, 2109; pret. subj. II. sg. þaet
þu þone waelgaest wihte ne grette, _that thou shouldst by no means seek out
the murderous spirit_ (Grendel), 1996; similarly, sg. III. þaet he ne grette
goldweard þone, 3082; pret. part. þaer waes ... gomenwudu greted, 1066.

ge-gretan, w. acc.: 1) _to greet, to salute, to address_: pret. sg. holdne
gegrette meaglum wordum, _greeted the dear man with formal words_, 1981;
gegrette þa gumena gehwylcne ... hindeman siethe, _spoke then the last time
to each of the men_, 2517.--2) _to approach, to come near, to seek out_:
inf. sceal ... manig oetherne godum gegretan ofer ganotes baeeth, _many a one
will seek another across the sea with gifts_, 1862.

greot, st. m., _grit, sand, earth_: dat. sg. on greote, 3169.

greotan, st. v., _to weep, to mourn, to lament_: pres. sg. III. se þe aefter
sincgyfan on sefan greoteeth, _who laments in his heart for the
treasure-giver_, 1343.

grim, adj., _grim, angry, wild, hostile_: nom. sg., 121, 555, 1500, etc.;
weak form, se grimma gaest, 102; acc. sg. m. grimne, 1149, 2137; fem,
grimme, 1235; gen. sg. grimre guethe, 527; instr. pl. grimman grapum,
1543.--Comp.: beado-, heaetho-, heoro-, searo-grim.

grimme, adv., _grimly, in a hostile manner, bitterly_, 3013, 3086.

grim-lic, adj., _grim, terrible_: nom. sg. grimlic gry[re-gaest], 3042.

grimman, st. v., (properly _to snort_), _to go forward hastily, to hasten_:
pret. pl. grummon, 306.

grindan, st. v., _to grind_, in

for-grindan, _to destroy, to ruin_: pret. sg. w. dat. forgrand gramum,
_destroyed the enemy, killed them_ (?), 424; pret. part. w. acc. haefde
ligdraca leoda faesten ... gledum forgrunden, _had with flames destroyed the
people's feasts_, 2336; þa his agen (scyld) waes gledum forgrunden, _since
his own (shield) had been destroyed by the fire_, 2678.

gripe, st. m., _gripe, attack_: nom. sg. gripe meces, 1766; acc. sg. grimne
gripe, 1149.--Comp.: faer-, mund-, nieth-gripe.

grima, w. m., _mask, visor_: in comp. beado-, here-grima.

grim-helm, st. m., _mask-helmet, helmet with visor_: acc. pl. grim-helmas,
334.

gripan, st. v., _to gripe, to seize, to grasp_: pret. sg. grap þa togeanes,
_then she caught at_, 1502.

for-gripan _(to gripe vehemently), to gripe so as to kill, to kill by the
grasp_, w. dat.: pret. sg. aet guethe forgrap Grendeles maegum, 2354.
wieth-gripan, w. dat., _(to seize at), to maintain, to hold erect_: inf. hu
wieth þam aglaecean elles meahte gylpe wieth-gripan, _how else I might maintain
my boast of battle against the monster_, 2522.

growan, st. v., _to grow, to sprout_: pret. sg. him on ferhethe greow
breosthord blodreow, 1719.

grund, st. m.: 1) _ground, plain, fields_ in contrast with highlands;
_earth_ in contrast with heaven: dat. sg. sohte ... aefter grunde, _sought
along the ground_, 2295; acc. pl. ofer grundas, 1405, 2074.--2) _bottom,
the lowest part_: acc. sg. grund (of the sea of Grendel), 1368; on gyfenes
grund, 1395; under gynne grund (_bottom of the sea_) 1552; dat. sg. to
grunde (of the sea), 553; grunde (of the drake's cave) getenge, 2759; so,
on grunde, 2766.--Comp.: eormen-, mere-, sae-grund.

grund-buend, pres. part., _inhabitant of the earth_: gen. pl.
grund-buendra, 1007.

grund-hyrde, st. m., _warder of the bottom_ (of the sea): acc. sg. (of
Grendel's mother), 2137.

grund-sele, st. m., _hall at the bottom_ (of the sea): dat sg. in þam
[grund]sele, 2140.

grund-wang, st. m., _ground surface, lowest surface_: acc. sg. þone
grund-wong (_bottom of the sea_), 1497; (bottom of the drake's cave), 2772,
2589.

grund-wyrgen, st. f., _she-wolf of the bottom_ (of the sea): acc. sg.
grund-wyrgenne (Grendel's mother), 1519.

gryn (cf. Gloss. Aldh. "retinaculum, rete grin," Hpts. Ztschr. IX. 429),
st. n., _net, noose, snare_: gen. pl. fela ... grynna, 931. See gyrn.

gryre, st. m., _horror, terror, anything causing terror_: nom. sg., 1283;
acc. sg. wieth Grendles gryre, 384; hie Wyrd forsweop on Grendles gryre,
_snatched them away into the horror of Grendel, to the horrible Grendel_,
478; dat. pl. mid gryrum ecga, 483; gen. pl. swa fela gryra, 592.--Comp.:
faer-, wig-gryre.

gryre-broga, w. m., _terror and horror, amazement_: nom. sg.
[gryre-]br[o]g[a], 2229.

gryre-fah, adj., _gleaming terribly_: acc. sg. gryre-fahne (_the
fire-spewing drake_, cf. also [draca] fyrwylmum fah, 2672), 2577.

gryre-gaest, st. m., _terror-guest, stranger causing terror_: nom. sg.
grimlic gry[regaest], 3042; dat. sg. wieth þam gryregieste (the dragon), 2561.

gryre-geatwe, st. f. pl., _terror-armor, warlike equipment_: dat. pl. in
hyra gryre-geatwum, 324.

gryre-leoeth, st. n., _terror-song, fearful song_: acc. sg. gehyrdon
gryreleoeth galan godes and-sacan (_heard Grendel's cry of agony_), 787.

gryre-lic, adj., _terrible, horrible_: acc. sg. gryre-licne, 1442, 2137.

gryre-sieth, st. m., _way of terror, way causing terror_, i.e. warlike
expedition: acc. pl. se þe gryre-siethas gegan dorste, 1463.

guma, w. m., _man, human being_: nom. sg., 653, 869, etc.; acc. sg. guman,
1844, 2295; dat. sg. guman (gumum, MS.), 2822; nom pl. guman, 215, 306,
667, etc.; acc. pl. guman, 615; dat. pl. gumum, 127, 321; gen. pl. gumena,
73, 328, 474, 716, etc.--Comp.: driht-, seld-guma.

gum-cyn, st. n., _race of men, people, nation_: gen. sg. we synt gumcynnes
Geata leode, _people from the nation of the Geatas_, 260; dat. pl. aefter
gum-cynnum, _along the nations, among the nations_, 945.

gum-cyst, st. f., _man's excellence, man's virtue_: acc. sg. (or pl.)
gumcyste, 1724; dat. pl. as adv., _excellently, preeminently_: gumcystum
godne beaga bryttan, 1487; gumcystum god ... hilde-hlemma (Beowulf), 2544.

gum-dream, st. m., _joyous doings of men_: acc. sg. gum-dream ofgeaf
(died), 2470.

gum-dryhten, st. m., _lord of men_: nom. sg. 1643.

gum-feetha, w. m., _troop of men going on foot_: nom. sg., 1402.

gum-man, st. m., _man_: gen. pl. gum-manna fela, 1029.

gum-stol, st. m., _man's seat_ [Greek: kat'ezochaen] _ruler's seat, throne_:
dat. sg. in gumstole, 1953.

gueth, st. f., _combat, battle_: nom. sg., 1124, 1659, 2484, 2537; acc. sg.
guethe, 604; instr. sg. guethe, 1998; dat. sg. to (aet) guethe, 438, 1473. 1536,
2354, etc.; gen. sg. guethe, 483, 527, 631, etc.; dat. pl. guethum, 1959, 2179;
gen. pl. guetha, 2513, 2544.

gueth-beorn, st. m., _warrior_: gen. pl. gueth-beorna sum (_the strand-guard on
the Danish coast_), 314.

gueth-bil, st. n., _battle-bill_: nom. sg. guethbill, 2585; gen. pl. gueth-billa
nan, 804.

gueth-byrne, w. f., _battle-corselet_: nom. sg., 321.

gueth-cearu, st. f., _sorrow which the combat brings_: dat. sg. aefter
gueth-ceare, 1259.

gueth-craeft, st. m., _warlike strength, power in battle_: nom. sg. Grendles
gueth-craeft, 127.

gueth-cyning, st. m., _king in battle, king directing a battle_: nom. sg.,
199, 1970, 2336, etc.

gueth-deaeth, st. m., _death in battle_: nom. sg., 2250.

gueth-floga, w. m., _flying warrior_: acc. sg. wieth þone guethflogan (the
drake), 2529.

gueth-freca, w. m., _hero in battle, warrior_ (see freca): nom. sg. gearo
gueth-freca, of the drake, 2415.

gueth-fremmend, pres. part., _fighting a battle, warrior_: gen. pl.
gueth-fremmendra, 246; gueth- (god-, MS.) fremmendra swylcum, _such a warrior_
(meaning Beowulf), 299.

gueth-gewaede, st. n., _battle-dress, armor_: nom. pl. gueth-gewaedo, 227; acc.
pl. -gewaedu, 2618, 2631(?), 2852, 2872; gen. pl. -gewaeda, 2624.

gueth-geweorc, st. n., _battle-work warlike deed_: gen. pl., -geweorca, 679,
982, 1826.

gueth-geatwe, st. f. pl., _equipment for combat_: acc. þa gueth-geatwa
(-getawa, MS.), 2637; dat. in eowrum gueth-geatawum, 395.

gueth-helm, st. m., _battle-helmet_: nom. sg., 2488.

gueth-horn, st. n., _battle-horn_: acc. sg., 1433.

gueth-hreeth, st. f., _battle-fame_: nom. sg., 820.

gueth-leoeth, st. n., _battle-song_: acc., sg., 1523.

gueth-mod, adj., _disposed to battle, having an inclination to battle_. nom.
pl. gueth-mode, 306.

gueth-raes, st. m., _storm of battle, attack_: acc. sg., 2992; gen. pl.
gueth-raesa, 1578, 2427.

gueth-reow, adj., _fierce in battle_: nom. sg., 58.

gueth-rinc, st. m., _man of battle, fighter, warrior_: nom. sg., 839, 1119,
1882; acc. sg., 1502; gen. pl. gueth-rinca, 2649.

gueth-rof, adj., _renowned in battle_: nom. sg., 609.

gueth-sceaetha, w. m., _battle-foe, enemy in combat_: nom. sg., of the drake,
2319.

gueth-scearu, st. f., _decision of the battle_: dat. sg. aefter gueth-sceare,
1214.

gueth-sele, st. m., _battle-hall, hall in which a battle takes place_: dat
sg. in þaem guethsele (in Heorot), 443.

gueth-searo, st. n. pl., _battle-equipment, armor_; acc., 215, 328.

gueth-sweord, st. n., _battle-sword_: acc. sg., 2155.

gueth-werig, adj., _wearied by battle dead_: acc. sg. gueth-werigne Grendel,
1587.

gueth-wine, st. m., _battle-friend, comrade in battle_ designation of the
sword: acc. sg., 1811; instr. pl. þe mec gueth-winum gretan dorste, _who
dared to attack me with his war-friends_, 2736.

gueth-wiga, w. m., _fighter of battles, warrior_: nom. sg., 2112.

gyd. See gid.

gyfan. See gifan.

gyldan. See gildan.

gylden, adj., _golden_: nom. sg. gylden hilt, 1678; acc. sg. segen
gyldenne, 47, 1022; bring gyldenne, 2810; dat. sg. under gyldnum beage,
1164.--Comp. eal-gylden.

gylp. See gilp.

gyrdan, w. v., _to gird, to lace_: pret. part. gyrded cempa, _the (sword-)
girt warrior_, 2079.

gyrn, st. n., _sorrow, harm_: nom. sg., 1776.

gyrn-wracu, st. f., _revenge for harm_: dat. sg. to gyrn-wraece, 1139; gen.
sg. þa waes eft hraethe gearo gyrn-wraece Grendeles modor, _then was Grendel's
mother in turn immediately ready for revenge for the injury_, 2119.

gyrwan. See gerwan.

gystran. See gistran.

gyman, w. v. w. gen., _to take care of, to be careful about_: pres. III.
gymeeth, 1758, 2452; imp. sg. oferhyda ne gym! _do not study arrogance_
(despise it), 1761.

for-gyman, w. acc., _to neglect, to slight_: pres. sg. III. he þa
foreth-gesceaft forgyteeth and forgymeeth, 1752.

gytsian. See gitsian.

gyt. See git.


H

habban, w. v., _to have_: 1) w. acc.: pres. sg. I. þaes ic wen haebbe (_as I
hope_), 383; þe ic geweald haebbe, 951; ic me on hafu bord and byrnan, _have
on me shield and coat of mail_, 2525; hafo, 3001; sg. II. þu nu [friethu]
hafast, 1175; pl. I. habbaeth we ... micel aerende, 270; pres. subj. sg. III.
þaet he þrittiges manna maegencraeft on his mundgripe haebbe, 381. Blended with
the negative: pl. III. þaet be Sae-Geatas selran naebben to geceosenne cyning
aenigne, _that the Sea-Geatas will have no better king than you to choose_,
1851; imp. hafa nu and geheald husa selest, 659; inf. habban, 446, 462,
3018; pret. sg. haefde, 79, 518, 554; pl. haefdon, 539.--2) used as an
auxiliary with the pret. part.: pres. sg. I. haebbe ic ... ongunnen, 408;
haebbe ic ... geahsod, 433; II. hafast, 954, 1856; III. hafaeth, 474, 596;
pret. sg. haefde, 106, 220, 666, 2322, 2334, 2953, etc.; pl. haefdon, 117,
695, 884, 2382, etc. Pret. part. inflected: nu scealc hafaeth daed gefremede,
940; haefde se goda ... cempan gecorone, 205. With the pres. part. are
formed the compounds: bord-, rond-haebbend.

for-habban, _to hold back, to keep one's self_: inf. ne meahte waefre mod
forhabban in hreethre, _the expiring life could not hold itself back in the
breast_, 1152; ne mihte þa for-habban, _could not restrain himself_, 2610.

wieth-habban, _to resist, to offer resistance_: pret. þaet se winsele
wieth-haefde heaetho-deorum, _that the hall resisted them furious in fight_,
773.

hafela, heafola, w. m., _head_: acc. sg. hafelan, 1373, 1422, 1615, 1636,
1781; na þu minne þearft hafalan hydan, 446; þonne we on orlege hafelan
weredon, _protected our heads, defended ourselves_, 1328; se hwita helm
hafelan werede, 1449; dat. sg. hafelan, 673, 1522; heafolan, 2680; gen. sg.
heafolan, 2698; nom. pl. hafelan, 1121.--Comp. wig-heafola.

hafenian, w. v., _to raise, to uplift_: pret. sg. waepen hafenade heard be
hiltum, _raised the weapon, the strong man, by the hilt_, 1574.

hafoc, st. m., _hawk_: nom. sg., 2264.

haga, w. m., _enclosed piece of ground, hedge, farm-enclosure_: dat. sg. to
hagan, 2893, 2961.

haga, w. m. See an-haga.

hama, homa, w. m., _dress_: in the comp. flaesc-, fyrd-, lic-hama, scir-ham
(adj.).

hamer, st. m., _hammer_: instr. sg. hamere, 1286; gen. pl. homera lafe
(swords), 2830.

hand, hond, st. f., _hand_: nom. sg. 2138; sio swiethre ... hand, _the right
hand_, 2100; hond, 1521, 2489, 2510; acc. sg. hand, 558, 984; hond, 657,
687, 835, 928, etc.; dat. sg. on handa, 495, 540; mid handa, 747, 2721; be
honda, 815; dat. pl. (as instr.) hondum, 1444, 2841.

hand-bana, w. m., _murderer with the hand_, or _in hand-to-hand combat_:
dat. sg. to hand-bonan (-banan), 460, 1331.

hand-gemot, st. n., _hand-to-hand conflict, battle_: gen. pl. (ecg) þolode
aer fela hand-gemota, 1527; no þaet laesest waes hond-gemota, 2356.

hand-gesella, w. m., _hand-companion, man of the retinue_: dat. pl.
hond-gesellum, 1482.

hand-gestealla, w. m., _(one whose position is near at hand), comrade,
companion, attendant_: dat. sg. hond-gesteallan, 2170; nom. pl.
hand-gesteallan, 2597.

hand-geweorc, st. n., _work done with the hands_, i.e. achievement in
battle: dat. sg. for þaes hild-fruman hondgeweorce, 2836.

hand-gewriethen, pret. part. _hand-wreathed, bound with the hand._ acc. pl.
waelbende ... hand-gewriethene, 1938.

hand-locen, pret. part., _joined, united by hand_: nom. sg. (gueth-byrne,
lic-syrce) hondlocen (because the shirts of mail consisted of interlaced
rings), 322, 551.

hand-raes, st. m., _hand-battle_, i.e. combat with the hands: nom. sg.
hond-raes, 2073.

hand-scalu, st. f., _hand-attendance, retinue_: dat. sg. mid his hand-scale
(hond-scole), 1318, 1964.

hand-sporu, st. f., _finger_ (on Grendel's hand), under the figure of a
spear: nom. pl. hand-sporu, 987.

hand-wundor, st. n., _wonder done by the hand, wonderful handwork_: gen.
pl. hond-wundra maest, 2769.

hangan. See hon.

hangian, w. v., _to hang_: pres. sg. III. þonne his sunu hangaeth hrefne to
hroethre, _when his son hangs, a joy to the ravens_, 2448; pl. III. ofer þaem
(mere) hongiaeth hrimge bearwas, _over which frosty forests hang_, 1364; inf.
hangian, 1663; pret. hangode, _hung down_, 2086.

hatian, w. v. w. acc., _to hate, to be an enemy to, to hurt_: inf. he þone
heaetho-rinc hatian ne meahte laethum daedum (_could not do him any harm_),
2467; pret. sg. hu se gueth-sceaetha Geata leode hatode and hynde, 2320.

had, st. m., _form, condition, position, manner_: acc. sg. þurh haestne had,
_in a powerful manner_, 1336; on gesiethes had, _in the position of follower,
as follower_, 1298; on sweordes had, _in the form of a sword_, 2194. See
under on.

hador, st. m., _clearness, brightness_: acc. sg. under heofenes hador, 414.

hador, adj., _clear, fresh, loud_: nom. sg. scop hwilum sang hador on
Heorote, 497.

hadre, adv., _clearly, brightly_, 1572.

hal, adj., _hale, whole, sound, unhurt_: nom. sg. hal, 300. With gen.
heaetho-laces hal, _safe from battle_, 1975. As form of salutation, wes ...
hal, 407; dat. sg. halan lice, 1504.

halig, adj., _holy_: nom. sg. halig god, 381, 1554; halig dryhten, 687.

ham, st. m., _home, residence, estate, land_: acc. sg. ham, 1408; Hroethgares
ham, 718. Usually in adverbial sense: gewat him ham, _betook himself home_,
1602; to ham, 124, 374, 2993; fram ham, _at home_, 194; aet ham, _at home_,
1249, 1924, 1157; gen. sg. hames, 2367; acc. pl. hamas, 1128.--Comp.
Finnes-ham, 1157.

ham-weorethung, st. f., _honor_ or _ornament of home_: acc. sg. ham-weorethunge
(designation of the daughter of Hygelac, given in marriage to Eofor), 2999.

har, adj., _gray_: nom. sg. har hilde-rinc, 1308, 3137; acc. sg. under
(ofer) harne stan, 888, 1416, 2554; hare byrnan (i.e. iron shirt of mail),
2154; dat. sg. harum hildfruman, 1679; f. on heare haeethe (on heaw ... h ...
ethe, MS.), 2213; gen. sg. hares, _of the old man_, 2989.--Comp. un-har.

hat, adj., _hot, glowing, flaming_ nom sg., 1617, 2297, 2548, 2559, etc.;
wyrm hat gemealt, _the drake hot_ (of his own heat) _melted_, 898; acc.
sg., 2282(?); inst. sg. hatan heolfre, 850, 1424; g. sg. heaethu-fyres hates,
2523; acc. pl. hate heaetho-wylmas, 2820.--Sup.: hatost heaetho-swata, 1669.

hat, st. n., _heat, fire_: acc. sg. geseah his mondryhten ... hat þrowian,
_saw his lord endure the_ (drake's) _heat_, 2606.

hata, w. m., _persecutor_; in comp. daed-hata.

hatan, st. v.: 1) _to bid, to order, to direct_, with acc. and inf., and
acc. of the person: pres. sg. I. ic maguþegnas mine hate ... flotan eowerne
arum healdan, _I bid my thanes take good care of your craft_, 293; imp. sg.
II. hat in gan ... sibbegedriht, 386; pl. II. hataeth heaetho-maere hlaew
gewyrcean, 2803; inf. þaet healreced hatan wolde ... men gewyrcean, _that he
wished to command men to build a hall-edifice_, 68. Pret. sg. heht: heht
... eahta mearas ... on flet teon, _gave command to bring eight horses into
the hall_, 1036; þonne aenne heht golde forgyldan, _commanded to make good
that one with gold_, 1054; heht þa þaet heaetho-weorc to hagan biodan,
_ordered the combat to be announced at the hedge_(?), 2893; swa se snottra
heht, _as the wise_ (Hroethgar) _directed_, 1787; so, 1808, 1809. het: het
him yethlidan godne gegyrwan, _ordered a good vessel to be prepared for him_,
198; so, het, 391, 1115, 3111. As the form of a wish: het hine wel brucan,
1064; so, 2813; pret. part. þa waes haten hraethe Heort innan-weard folmum
gefraetwod, _forthwith was ordered Heorot, adorned by hand on the inside_
(i.e. that the edifice should be adorned by hand on the inside), 992.--2)
_to name, to call_: pres. subj. III. pl. þaet hit saeliethend ... hatan
Biowulfes biorh, _that mariners may call it Beowulf's grave-mound_, 2807;
pret. part. waes se grimma gaest Grendel haten, 102; so, 263, 373, 2603.

ge-hatan, _to promise, to give one's word, to vow, to threaten_: pres. sg.
I. ic hit þe gehate, 1393; so, 1672; pret. sg. he me mede gehet, _promised
me reward_, 2135; him faegre gehet leana (gen. pl.), _promised them proper
reward_, 2990; wean oft gehet earmre teohhe, _with woe often threatened the
unhappy band_, 2938; pret. pl. geheton aet haergtrafum wig-weorethunga, _vowed
offerings at the shrines of the gods_, 175; þonne we geheton ussum hlaforde
þaet ..., _when we promised our lord that_..., 2635; pret. part. sio gehaten
[waes] ... gladum suna Frodan, _betrothed to the glad son of Froda_, 2025.

hator, st. m. n., _heat_: in comp. and-hator.

haeft, adj., _held, bound, fettered_: nom. sg., 2409; acc. sg. helle haeftan,
_him fettered by hell_ (Grendel), 789.

haeft-mece, st. m., _sword with fetters_ or _chains_ (cf. fetel-hilt): dat.
sg. þaem haeft-mece, 1458. See Note.

haeg-steald, st. m., _man, liegeman, youth_: gen. pl. haeg-stealdra, 1890.

haele, st. m., _man_: nom. sg., 1647, 1817, 3112; acc. sg. haele, 720; dat.
pl. haelum (haenum, MS.), 1984.

haeleeth, st. m., _hero, fighter, warrior, man_: nom. sg., 190, 331, 1070;
nom. pl. haeleeth, 52, 2248, 2459, 3143; dat. pl. haeleethum 1710, 1962, etc.;
gen. pl. haeleetha, 467, 497, 612, 663, etc.

haerg. See hearg.

haeeth, st. f., _heath_: dat. sg. haeethe, 2213.

haeethen, adj., _heathenish_; acc. sg. haeethene sawle, 853; dat. sg. haeethnum
horde, 2217; gen. sg. haeethenes, _of the heathen_ (Grendel), 987; gen. pl.
haeethenra, 179.

haeeth-stapa, w. m., _that which goes about on the heath_ (stag): nom. sg.,
1369

hael, st. f.: 1) _health, welfare, luck_: acc. sg. him hael abead, 654; mid
haele, 1218.--2) _favorable sign, favorable omen_: hael sceawedon, _observed
favorable signs_ (for Beowulf's undertaking), 204.

haelo, st. f., _health, welfare, luck_: acc. sg. haelo abead heoreth-geneatum,
2419.--Comp. un-haelo.

haest (O.H.G. haistera hanti, manu violenta; heist, ira; heistigo,
iracunde), adj., _violent, vehement_: acc. sg. þurh haestne had, 1336.

he, fem. heo, neut. hit, pers. pron., _he, she, it_; in the oblique cases
also reflexive, _himself, herself, itself_: acc. sg. hine, hi, hit; dat.
sg. him, hire, him; gen. sg. his, hire, his; plur. acc. nom. hi, hig, hie;
dat. him; gen. hira, heora, hiera, hiora.--he omitted before the verb, 68,
300, 2309, 2345.

hebban, st. v., _to raise, to lift_, w. acc.: inf. siethethan ic hond and rond
hebban mihte, 657; pret. part. hafen, 1291; haefen, 3024.

a-hebban, _raise, to lift from, to take away_: waes ... icge gold ahafen of
horde, _taken up from the hoard_, 1109; þa waes ... wop up ahafen, _a cry of
distress raised_, 128

ge-hegan [ge-hegan], w. v., _to enclose, to fence_: þing gehegan, _to mark
off the court, hold court_. Here figurative: inf. sceal ... ana gehegan
þing wieth þyrse (_shall alone decide the matter with Grendel_), 425.

hel, st. f., _hell_: nom. sg., 853; acc. sg. helle, 179; dat. sg. helle,
101, 589; (as instr.), 789; gen. sg. helle, 1275.

hel-bend, st. m. f. _bond of hell_: instr. pl. hell-bendum faest, 3073.

hel-runa, w. m., _sorcerer_: nom. pl. helrunan, 163.

be-helan, st. v., _to conceal, to hide_: pret. part. be-holen, 414.

helm, st. m.: 1) _protection in general, defence, covering that protects_:
acc. sg. on helm, 1393; under helm, 1746.--2) _helmet_: nom. sg., 1630;
acc. sg. helm, 673, 1023, 1527, 2988; (helo, MS.), 2724; brun-fagne,
gold-fahne helm, 2616, 2812; dat. sg. under helme, 342, 404; gen. sg.
helmes, 1031; acc. pl. helmas, 240, 2639.--3) _defence, protector_,
designation of the king: nom. sg. helm Scyldinga (Hroethgar), 371, 456, 1322;
acc. sg. heofena helm _(the defender of the heavens_ = God), 182; helm
Scylfinga, 2382.--Comp.: grim-, gueth-, heaetho-, niht-helm.

ofer-helmian, w. v. w. acc., _to cover over, to overhang_: pres. sg. III.
ofer-helmaeth, 1365.

helm-berend, pres. part., _helm-wearing_ (warrior): acc. pl. helmberend,
2518, 2643.

helpan, st. v., _to help_: inf. þaet him holt-wudu helpan ne meahte, lind
wieth lige, _that a wooden shield could not help him, a linden shield against
flame_, 2341; þaet him irenna ecge mihton helpan aet hilde, 2685; wutun
gangan to, helpan hildfruman, _let us go thitherto help the battle-chief_,
2650; w. gen. ongan ... maeges helpan, _began to help my kinsman_, 2880; so,
pret. sg. þaer he his maeges (MS. maegenes) healp, 2699.

help, m. and f., _help, support, maintenance_: acc. sg. helpe, 551, 1553;
dat. sg. to helpe, 1831; acc. sg. helpe, 2449.

hende, _-handed_: in comp. idel-hende.

her, adv., _here_, 397, 1062, 1229, 1655, 1821, 2054, 2797, etc.; _hither_,
244, 361, 376.

here (Goth, harji-s), st. m., _army, troops_: dat. sg. on herge, _in the
army, on a warlike expedition, 1249; in the army, among the fighting men_,
2639; as instr. herge, 2348.--Comp.: flot-, scip-, sin-here.

here-broga, w. m., _terror of the army, fear of war_: dat. sg. for
here-brogan, 462.

here-byrne, w. f., _battle-mail, coat of mail_: nom. sg., 1444.

here-grima, w. m., _battle-mask_, i.e. helmet (with visor): dat. sg.
-griman, 396, 2050, 2606.

here-net, st. n., _battle-net_, i.e. coat of mail (of interlaced rings):
nom. sg., 1554.

here-nieth, st. m., _battle-enmity, battle of armies_: nom. sg., 2475.

here-pad, st. f., _army-dress_, i.e. coat of mail, armor: nom. sg., 2259.

here-rinc, st. m., _army-hero, hero in battle, warrior_: acc. sg. here-rinc
(MS. here ric), 1177.

here-sceaft, st. m., _battle-shaft_, i.e. spear: gen. pl. here-sceafta
heap, 335.

here-sped, st. f., _(war-speed), luck in war_: nom. sg., 64.

here-strael, st. m., _war-arrow, missile_: nom. sg., 1436.

here-syrce, w. f., _battle-shirt, shirt of mail_: acc. sg. here-syrcan,
1512.

here-waed, st. f., _army-dress, coat of mail, armor_: dat. pl. (as instr.)
here-waedum, 1898.

here-waesma, w. m., _war-might, fierce strength in battle_: dat. pl. an
here-waesmum, 678.--Leo.

here-wisa, w. m., _leader of the army_, i.e. ruler, king: nom. sg., 3021.

herg, hearg, st. m., _image of a god, grove where a god was worshipped_,
hence to the Christian a wicked place(?): dat. pl. hergum geheaetherod,
_confined in wicked places_ (parallel with hell-bendum faest), 3073.

herigean, w. v. w. dat. of pers., _to provide with an army, to support with
an army_: pres. sg. I. ic þe wel herige, 1834.--Leo.

hete, st. m., _hate, enmity_: nom. sg. 142, 2555.--Comp.: ecg-, morethor-,
wig-hete.

hete-lic, adj., _hated_: nom. sg., 1268.

hetend, hettend, (pres. part. of hetan, see hatian), _enemy_, hostis: nom.
pl. hetende, 1829; dat. pl. wieth hettendum, 3005.

hete-nieth, st. m., _enmity full of hate_: acc. pl. hete-niethas, 152.

hete-sweng, st. m., _a blow from hate_: acc. pl. hete-swengeas, 2226.

hete-þanc, st. m., _hate-thought, a hostile design_: dat. pl. mid his
hete-þancum, 475.

hedan, ge-hedan, w. v. w. gen.: 1) _to protect_: pret. sg. ne hedde he þaes
heafolan, _did not protect his head_, 2698.--2) _to obtain_: subj. pret.
sg. III. gehedde, 505.

herian, w. v. w. acc., _to praise, to commend_: with reference to God, _to
adore_: inf. heofena helm herian ne cuethon, _could not worship the defence
of the heavens_ (God), 182; ne huru Hildeburh herian þorfte Eotena treowe,
_had no need to praise the fidelity of the Eotens_, 1072; pres. subj. þaet
mon his wine-dryhten wordum herge, 3177.

ge-heaetherian, w. v., _to force, to press in_: pret. part. ge-heaetherod,
3073.

heaetho-byrne, w. f., _battle-mail, shirt of mail_: nom. sg., 1553.

heaetho-deor, adj., _bold in battle, brave_: nom. sg., 689; dat. pl.
heaetho-deorum, 773.

heaetho-fyr, st. n., _battle-fire, hostile fire_: gen. sg. heaethu-fyres, 2523;
instr. pl. heaetho-fyrum, 2548, of the drake's fire-spewing.

heaetho-grim, adj., _grim in battle_, 548.

heaetho-helm, st. m., _battle-helmet, war-helmet_: nom. sg., 3157(?).

heaetho-lac, st. n., _battle-play, battle_: dat. sg. aet heaetho-lace, 584; gen.
sg. heaetho-laces hal, 1975.

heaetho-maere, adj., _renowned in battle_: acc. pl. -maere, 2803.

heaetho-raes, st. m., _storm of battle, attack in battle, entrance by force_:
nom. sg., 557; acc. pl. -raesas, 1048; gen. pl. -raesa, 526.

heaetho-reaf, st. n., _battle-dress, equipment for battle_: acc. sg.
heaetho-reaf heoldon (_kept the equipments_), 401.

heaetho-rinc, st. m., _battle-hero, warrior_: acc. sg. þone heaetho-rinc
(Hreethel's son, Haeethcyn), 2467; dat. pl. þaem heaetho-rincum, 370.

heaetho-rof, adj., _renowned in battle_: nom. sg., 381; nom. pl. heaetho-rofe,
865.

heaetho-scearp, adj., _sharp in battle, bold_: n. m. pl. (-scearde, MS.),
2830.

heaetho-seoc, adj., _battle-sick_: dat. sg. -siocum, 2755.

heaetho-steap, adj., _high in battle, excelling in battle_: nom. sg. in weak
form, heaetho-steapa, 1246; acc. sg. heaetho-steapne, 2154, both times of the
helmet.

heaetho-swat, st. m., _blood of battle_: dat. sg. heaetho-swate, 1607; as
instr., 1461; gen. pl. hatost heaetho-swata, 1669.

heaetho-sweng, st. m., _battle-stroke_ (blow of the sword): dat. sg. aefter
heaethu-swenge, 2582.

heaetho-torht, adj., _loud, clear in battle_: nom. sg. stefn ... heaetho-torht,
_the voice clear in battle_, 2554.

heaetho-waed, st. f., _battle-dress, coat of mail, armor_: instr. pl.
heaetho-waedum, 39.

heaetho-weorc, st. n., _battle-work, battle_: acc. sg., 2893.

heaetho-wylm, st. m., _hostile (flame-) wave_: acc. pl. hate heaetho-wylmas,
2820; gen. pl. heaetho-wylma, 82.

heaf, st. n., _sea_: acc. pl. ofer heafo, 2478. See Note.

heafola. See hafela.

heal, st. f., _hall, main apartment, large building_ (consisting of an
assembly-hall and a banqueting-hall): nom. sg. heal, 1152, 1215; heall,
487; acc. sg. healle, 1088; dat. sg. healle, 89, 615, 643, 664, 926, 1010,
1927, etc.; gen. sg. [healle], 389.--Comp.: gif-, meodo-heal.

heal-aern, st. n., _hall-building, hall-house_: gen. sg. heal-aerna, 78.

heal-gamen, st. n., _social enjoyment in the hall, hall-joy_: nom. sg.,
1067.

heal-reced, st. n., _hall-building_: acc. sg., 68.

heal-sittend, pres. part., _sitting in the hall_ (at the banquet): dat. pl.
heal-sittendum, 2869; gen. pl. heal-sittendra, 2016.

heal-þegn, st. m., _hall-thane_, i.e. a warrior who holds the hall: gen.
sg. heal-þegnes, of Grendel, 142; acc. pl. heal-þegnas, of Beowulfs band,
720.

heal-wudu, _hall-wood_, i.e. hall built of wood: nom. sg., 1318.

healdan, st. v. w. acc.: 1) _to hold, to hold fast; to support_: pret. pl.
hu þa stanbogan ... ece eorethreced innan heoldon (MS. healde), _how the
arches of rock within held the everlasting earth-house_, 2720. Pret. sg.,
with a person as object: heold hine to faeste, _held him too fast_, 789; w.
the dat. he him freondlarum heold, _supported him with friendly advice_,
2378.--2) _to hold, to watch, to preserve, to keep_; reflexive, _to
maintain one's self, to keep one's self_: pres. sg. II. eal þu hit geþyldum
healdest, maegen mid modes snyttrum, _all that preservest thou continuously,
strength and wisdom of mind_, 1706; III. healdeeth hige-meethum heafod-wearde,
_holds for the dead the head-watch_, 2910; imp. sg. II. heald foreth tela
niwe sibbe, _keep well, from now on, the new relationship_, 949; heald
(heold, MS.) þu nu hruse ... eorla aehte, _preserve thou now, Earth, the
noble men's possessions_, 2248; inf. se þe holmclifu healdan scolde, _watch
the sea-cliffs_, 230; so, 705; nacan ... arum healdan, _to keep well your
vessel_, 296; wearde healdan, 319; forleton eorla gestreon eorethan healdan,
3168; pres. part. dream healdende, _holding rejoicing_ (i.e. thou who art
rejoicing), 1228; pret. sg. heold hine syethethan fyr and faestor, _kept himself
afterwards afar and more secure_, 142; aegwearde heold, _I have (hitherto)
kept watch on the sea_, 241; so, 305; hiold heah-lufan wieth haeleetha brego,
_preserved high love_, 1955; ginfaestan gife ... heold, 2184; gold-maethmas
heold, _took care of the treasures of gold_, 2415; heold min tela,
_protected well mine own_, 2738; þonne ... sceft ... nytte heold, _had
employment, was employed_, 3119; heold mec, _protected_, i.e. brought me
up, 2431; pret. pl. heaetho-reaf heoldon, _watched over the armor_, 401; sg.
for pl. heafodbeorge ... walan utan heold, _outwards, bosses kept guard
over the head_, 1032.--Related to the preceding meaning are the two
following: 3) _to rule and protect the fatherland_: inf. gif þu healdan
wylt maga rice, 1853; pret. heold, 57, 2738.--4) _to hold, to have, to
possess, to inhabit_: inf. let þone brego-stol Beowulf healdan, 2390;
gerund. to healdanne hleoburh wera, 1732; pret. sg. heold, 103, 161, 466,
1749, 2752; lyftwynne heold nihtes hwilum, _at night-time had the enjoyment
of the air_, 3044; pret. pl. Geata leode hreawic heoldon, _the Geatas held
the place of corpses_ (lay dead upon it), 1215; pret. sg. þaer heo aer maeste
heold worolde wynne, _in which she formerly possessed the highest earthly
joy_, 1080.--5) _to win, to receive_: pret. pl. I. heoldon heah gesceap,
_we received a heavy fate, heavy fate befell us_, 3085.

be-healdan, w. acc.: 1) _to take care of, to attend to_: pret. sg. þegn
nytte beheold, _a thane discharged the office_, 494; so, 668.--2) _to
hold_: pret. sg. se þe floda begong ... beheold, 1499.--3) _to look at, to
behold_: þryethswyeth beheold maeg Higelaces hu ..., _great woe saw H.'s
kinsman, how ..._, 737.

for-healdan, w. acc., _(to hold badly), to fall away from, to rebel_: pret.
part. haefdon hy forhealden helm Scylfinga, _had rebelled against the
defender of the Scylfings_, 2382.

ge-healdan: 1) _to hold, to receive, to hold fast_: pres. sg. III. se þe
waldendes hyldo gehealdeeth, _who receives the Lord's grace_, 2294; pres.
subj. faeder alwalda ... eowic gehealde sietha gesunde, _keep you sound on
your journey_, 317; inf. ne meahte he ... on þam frum-gare feorh gehealdan,
_could not hold back the life in his lord_, 2857.--2) _to take care, to
preserve, to watch over; to stop_: imp. sg. hafa nu and geheald husa
selest, 659; inf. gehealdan het hilde-geatwe, 675; pret. sg. he fraetwe
geheold fela missera, 2621; þone þe aer geheold wieth hettendum hord and rice,
_him who before preserved treasure and realm_, 3004.--3) _to rule_: inf.
folc gehealdan, 912; pret. sg. geheold tela (brade rice), 2209.

healf, st. f., _half, side, part_: acc. sg. on þa healfe, _towards this
side_, 1676; dat. sg. haeleethum be healfe, _at the heroes' side_, 2263; acc.
pl. on twa healfa, _upon two sides, mutually_, 1096; on ba healfa (healfe),
_on both sides_ (to Grendel and his mother), 1306; _on two sides, on both
sides_, 2064; gen. pl. on healfa gehwone, _in half, through the middle_,
801.

healf, adj., _half_: gen. sg. healfre, 1088.

heals, st. m., _neck_: acc. sg. heals, 2692; dat. sg. wieth halse, 1567; be
healse, 1873.--Comp.: the adjectives famig-, wunden-heals.

heals-beah, st. m., _neck-ring, collar_: acc. sg. þone heals-beah, 2173;
gen. pl. heals-beaga, 1196.

heals-gebedde, w. f., _beloved bedfellow, wife_: nom. sg. healsgebedde (MS.
healsgebedda), 63.

healsian, w. v. w. acc., _to entreat earnestly, to implore_: pret. sg. þa
se þeoden mec ... healsode hreoh-mod þaet..., _entreated me sorrowful,
that_..., 2133.

heard, adj.: 1) of persons, _able, efficient in war, strong, brave_: nom.
sg. heard, 342, 376, 404, 1575, 2540, etc.; in weak form, se hearda, 401,
1964; se hearda þegn, 2978; þes hearda heap, 432; nom. pl. hearde
hilde-frecan, 2206; gen. pl. heardra, 989. Comparative: acc. sg. heardran
haele, 720. With accompanying gen.: wiges heard, _strong in battle_, 887;
dat. sg. nietha heardum, 2171.--2) of the implements of war, _good, firm,
sharp, hard_: nom. sg. (gueth-byrne, lic-syrce) heard, 322, 551. In weak
form: masc. here-strael hearda, 1436; se hearda helm, 2256; neutr. here-net
hearde, 1554; acc. sg. (swurd, waepen), heard, 540, 2688, 2988; nom. pl.
hearde ... homera lafe, 2830; heard and hring-mael Heaethobeardna gestreon,
2038; acc. pl. heard sweord, 2639. Of other things, _hard, rough, harsh,
hard to bear_: acc. sg. hreether-bealo hearde, 1344; nom. sg. wroht ...
heard, 2915; here-nieth hearda, 2475; acc. sg. heoro-sweng heardne, 1591;
instr. sg. heardan ceape, 2483; instr. pl. heardan, heardum clammum, 964,
1336; gen. pl. heardra hynetha, 166. Compar.: acc. sg. heardran feohtan,
576.--Comp.: fyr-, iren-, nieth-, regn-, scur-heard.

hearde, adv., _hard, very_, 1439.

heard-ecg, adj., _sharp-edged, hard, good in battle_: nom. sg., 1289.

heard-fyrde, adj., _hard to take away, heavy_: acc. sg. hard-fyrdne,
2246.--Leo.

heard-hycgend, pres. part. _of a warlike disposition, brave_: nom. pl.
-hicgende, 394, 800.

hearg-traef, st. n., _tent of the gods, temple_: dat. pl. aet haerg-trafum
(MS. hraerg trafum), 175.

hearm, st. m., _harm, injury, insult_: dat. sg. mid hearme, 1893.

hearm-sceaetha, w. m., _enemy causing injury_ or _grief_: nom. sg.
hearm-scaetha, 767.

hearpe, w. f., _harp_: gen. sg. hearpan sweg, 89, 3024; hearpan wynne
(wyn), 2108, 2263.

heaethu, st. f., _sea, waves_: acc. sg. heaethu, 1863?

heaethu-liethend, pres. part., _sea-farer, sailor_: nom. pl. -liethende, 1799;
dat. pl. -liethendum (designation of the Geatas), 2956.

heafod, st. n., _head_: acc. sg., 48, 1640; dat. sg. heafde, 1591, 2291,
2974; dat. pl. heafdum, 1243.

heafod-beorh, st. f., _head-defence, protection for the head_: acc. sg.
heafod-beorge, 1031.

heafod-maeg, st. m., _head-kinsman, near blood-relative_: dat. pl.
heafod-maegum (_brothers_), 589; gen. pl. heafod-maga, 2152.

heafod-segn, st. n., _head-sign, banner_: acc. sg., 2153.

heafod-weard, st. f., _head-watch_ acc. sg. healdeeth ... heafod-wearde
leofes and laethes, _for the friend and the foe_ (Beowulf and the drake, who
lie dead near each other), 2910.

heah, hea, adj., _high, noble_ (in composition, also primus): nom. sg. heah
Healfdene, 57; hea (Higelac), 1927; heah (sele), 82; heah hlaew, 2806, 3159;
acc. sg. heah (segn), 48, 2769; heahne (MS. heanne) hrof, 984; dat. sg. in
(to) sele þam hean, 714, 920; gen. sg. hean huses, 116.--_high, heavy_:
acc. heah gesceap (_an unusual, heavy fate_), 3085.

hea-burh, st. f., _high city, first city of a country_: acc. sg., 1128.

heah-cyning, st. m., _high king, mightiest of the kings_: gen. sg.
-cyninges (of Hroethgar), 1040.

heah-gestreon, st. n., _splendid treasure_: gen. pl. -gestreona, 2303.

heah-lufe, w. f., _high love_: acc. sg. heah-lufan, 1955.

heah-sele, st. m., _high hall, first hall in the land, hall of the ruler_:
dat. sg. heah-sele, 648.

heah-setl, st. n., _high seat, throne_: acc. sg., 1088.

heah-stede, st. m., _high place, ruler's place_: dat. sg. on heah-stede,
285.

hean, adj., _depressed, low, despised, miserable_: nom. sg., 1275, 2100,
2184, 2409.

heap, st. m., _heap, crowd, troop_: nom. sg. þegna heap, 400; þes hearda
heap, _this brave band_, 432; acc. sg. here-sceafta heap, _the crowd of
spears_, 335; mago-rinca heap, 731; dat. sg. on heape, _in a compact body_,
as many as there were of them, 2597.--Comp. wig-heap.

heawan, st. v., _to hew, to cleave_: inf., 801.

ge-heawan, _cleave_: pres. subj. ge-heawe, 683.

heoethu, st. f., _the interior of a building_: dat. sg. þaet he on heoethe
gestod, _in the interior_ (of the hall, Heorot), 404.

heofon, st. m., _heaven_: nom. sg., 3157; dat. sg. hefene, 1572; gen. sg.
heofenes, 414, 576, 1802, etc.; gen. pl. heofena, 182; dat. pl. under
heofenum, 52, 505.

heolfor, st. n., _gore, fresh_ or _crude blood_: dat. instr. sg. hatan
heolfre, 850, 1424; heolfre, 2139; under heolfre, 1303.

heolster, st. n., _haunt, hiding-place_: acc. sg. on heolster, 756.

heonan, adv., _hence, from here_: heonan, 252; heonon, 1362.

heor, st. m., _door-hinge_: nom. pl. heorras, 1000.

heorde, adj. See wunden-heorde.

heoreth-geneat, st. m., _hearth-companion_, i.e. a vassal of the king, in
whose castle he receives his livelihood: nom. pl. heoreth-geneatas, 261,
3181; acc. pl. heoreth-geneatas, 1581, 2181; dat. pl. heoreth-geneatum, 2419.

heorot, st. m., _stag_: nom. sg., 1370.

heorte, w. f., _heart_: nom. sg., 2562; dat. sg. aet heortan, 2271; gen. sg.
heortan, 2464, 2508.--Comp.: the adjectives blieth-, grom-, rum-,
stearc-heort.

heoru, st. m., _sword_: nom. sg. heoru bunden (cf. under bindan), 1286. In
some of the following compounds heoro- seems to be confounded with here-
(see here).

heoro-blac, adj., _pale through the sword, fatally wounded_: nom. sg.
[heoro-]blac, 2489.

heoru-dreor, st. m., _sword-blood_: instr. sg. heoru-dreore, 487;
heoro-dreore, 850.

heoro-dreorig, adj., _bloody through the sword_: nom. sg., 936; acc. sg.
heoro-dreorigne, 1781, 2721.

heoro-drync, st. m., _sword-drink_, i.e. blood shed by the sword: instr.
pl. hioro-dryncum swealt, _died through sword-drink_, i.e. struck by the
sword, 2359.

heoro-gifre, adj., _eager for hostile inroads_: nom. sg., 1499.

heoro-grim, adj., _sword-grim, fierce in battle_: nom. sg. m., 1565; fem.
-grimme, 1848.

heoro-hocihte, adj., _provided with barbs, sharp like swords _: instr. pl.
mid eofer-spreotum heoro-hocyhtum, 1439.

heoro-serce, w. f., _shirt of mail_: acc. sg. hioro-sercean, 2540.

heoro-sweng, st. m., _sword-stroke_: acc. sg. 1591.

heoro-weallende, pres. part., _rolling around fighting_, of the drake,
2782. See weallian.

heoro-wearh, st. m. _he who is sword-cursed, who is destined to die by the
sword_: nom. sg., 1268.

heofan, w. v., _to lament, to moan_: part. nom. pl. hiofende, 3143.

a-heoran, _to free_ (?): w. acc. pret. sg. bryd aheorde, 2931.

heore, adj., _pleasant, not haunted, secure_: nom. sg. fem, nis þaet heoru
stow, _that is no secure place_, 1373.--Comp. un-heore (-hyre).

hider, adv., _hither_, 240, 370, 394, 3093, etc.

ofer-higian, w. v. (according to the connection, probably), _to exceed_,
2767. (O.H.G. ubar-hugjan, _to be arrogant_.)

hild, st. f., _battle, combat_: nom. sg., 452, 902, 1482, 2077; hild
heoru-grimme, 1848; acc. sg. hilde, 648; instr. sg. hilde, _through
combat_, 2917; dat. sg. aet hilde, 1461.

hilde-bil, st. n., _battle-sword_: nom. sg., 1667; instr. dat. sg.
hilde-bille, 557, 1521.

hilde-bord, st. n., _battle-shield_: acc. pl. hilde-bord, 397; instr. pl.
-bordum, 3140.

hilde-cyst, st. f., _excellence in battle, bravery in battle_: instr. pl.
-cystum, 2599.

hilde-deor, adj., _bold in battle, brave in battle_: nom. sg., 312, 835,
1647, 1817; hilde-dior, 3112; nom. pl. hilde-deore, 3171.

hilde-freca, w. m., _hero in battle_: nom. pl. hilde-frecan, 2206; dat. sg.
hild-frecan, 2367.

hilde-geatwe, st. f. pl., _equipment for battle, adornment for combat_:
acc. hilde-geatwe, 675; gen. -geatwa, 2363.

hilde-gicel, st. m., _battle-icicle_, i.e. the blood which hangs upon the
sword-blades like icicles: instr. pl. hilde-gicelum, 1607.

hilde-grap, st. f., _battle-gripe_: nom. sg., 1447, 2508.

hilde-hlemma, w. m., _one raging in battle, warrior, fighter_: nom. sg.,
2352, 2545; dat. pl. eft þaet ge-eode ... hilde-hlaemmum, _it happened to the
warriors_ (the Geatas), 2202.

hilde-leoma, w. m., _battle-light, gleam of battle_, hence: 1) the
fire-spewing of the drake in the fight: nom. pl. -leoman, 2584.--2) _the
gleaming sword_: acc. sg. -leoman, 1144.

hilde-mecg, st. m., _man of battle, warrior_: nom. pl. hilde-mecgas, 800.

hilde-mece, st. m., _battle-sword_: nom. pl. -meceas, 2203.

hilde-rand, st. m., _battle-shield_: acc. pl. -randas, 1243.

hllde-raes, st. m., _storm of battle_: acc. sg., 300.

hilde-rinc, st. m., _man of battle, warrior, hero_: nom. sg., 1308, 3125,
3137; dat. sg. hilde-rince, 1496; gen. sg. hilde-rinces, 987.

hilde-saed, adj., _satiated with battle, not wishing to fight any more_:
acc. sg. hilde-saedne, 2724.

hilde-sceorp, st. n., _battle-dress, armor, coat of mail_: acc. sg., 2156.

hilde-setl, st. n., _battle-seat_ (saddle): nom. sg., 1040.

hilde-strengo, st. f., _battle-strength, bravery in battle_: acc., 2114.

hilde-swat, st. m., _battle-sweat_: nom. sg. hat hilde-swat (the hot, damp
breath of the drake as he rushes on), 2559.

hilde-tux, st. m., _battle-tooth_: instr. pl. hilde-tuxum, 1512.

hilde-waepen, st. m., _battle-weapon_: instr. pl. -waepnum, 39.

hilde-wisa, w. m., _leader in battle, general_: dat. sg. fore Healfdenes
hildewisan, _Healfdene's general_ (Hnaef), 1065.

hild-freca. See hilde-freca

hild-fruma, st. m., _battle-chief_: dat. sg. -fruma, 1679, 2650; gen. sg.
þaes hild-fruman, 2836.

hlld-lata, w. m., _he who is late in battle, coward_: nom. pl. þa
hild-latan, 2847.

hilt, st. n., _sword-hilt_: nom. gylden hilt, 1678; acc. sg. þaet hilt,
1669; hylt, 1668. Also used in the plural; acc. þa hilt, 1615; dat. pl, be
hiltum, 1575.--Comp.: fetel-, wreoethen-hilt.

hilte-cumbor, st. n., _banner with a staff_: acc. sg., 1023.

hilted, pret. part., _provided with a hilt_ or _handle_: acc. sg. heard
swyrd hiked, _sword with a_ (rich) _hilt_, 2988.

hin-fus, adj., _ready to die_: nom. sg. hyge waes him hinfus (i.e. he felt
that he should not survive), 756.

hindema, adj. superl., _hindmost, last_: instr. sg. hindeman siethe, _the
last time, for the last time_, 2050, 2518.

hirde, hyrde, st. m., (_herd_) _keeper, guardian, possessor_: nom. sg.
folces hyrde, 611, 1833, 2982; rices hyrde, 2028; fyrena hyrde, _the
guardian of mischief, wicked one_, 751, 2220; wuldres hyrde, _the king of
glory, God_, 932; hringa hyrde, _the keeper of the rings_, 2246; cumbles
hyrde, _the possessor of the banner, the bearer of the banner_, 2506;
folces hyrde, 1850; fraetwa hyrde, 3134; rices hyrde, 3081; acc. pl. huses
hyrdas, 1667.--Comp.: grund-hyrde.

hit (O.N. hita), st. f. (?), _heat_: nom. sg. þenden hyt sy, 2650.

hladan, st. v.: 1) _to load, to lay_: inf. on bael hladan leofne mannan,
_lay the dear man on the funeral-pile_, 2127; him on bearm hladan bunan and
discas, _laid cups and plates upon his bosom, loaded himself with them_,
2776; pret. part. þaer waes wunden gold on waen hladen, _laid upon the wain_,
3135.--2) _to load, to burden_: pret. part. þa waes ... saegeap naca hladen
herewaedum, _loaded with armor_, 1898.--Comp. gilp-hlaeden.

ge-hladan, w. acc., _to load, to burden_: pret. sg. saebat gehlod (MS
gehleod), 896.

hlaford, st. m., _lord, ruler_: nom. sg., 2376; acc. sg., 267; dat. sg.
hlaforde, 2635; gen. sg. hlafordes, 3181.--Comp. eald-hlaford.

hlaford-leas; adj., _without a lord_: nom. pl. hlaford-lease, 2936.

hlaw, hlaew, st. m., _grave-hill_: acc. sg. hlaew, 2803, 3159, 3171; dat. sg.
for hlawe, 1121. Also, _grave-chamber_ (the interior of the grave-hill),
_cave_: acc. sg. hlaw [under] hrusan, 2277; hlaew under hrusan, 2412; dat.
sg. on hlaewe, 2774. The drake dwells in the rocky cavern which the former
owner of his treasure had chosen as his burial-place, 2242-2271.

hlaest, st. n., _burden, load_: dat. sg. hlaeste, 52.

hlem, st. m., _noise, din of battle, noisy attack_: in the compounds, uht-,
wael-hlem.

hlemma, w. m., _one raging, one who calls_; see hilde-hlemma.

a-hlehhan, st. v., _to laugh aloud, to shout, to exult_: pret. sg. his mod
ahlog, _his mood exulted_, 731.

hleahtor, st. m., _laughter_: nom. sg., 612; acc. sg., 3021.

hleapan, st. v., _to run, to trot, to spring_: inf. hleapan leton ...
fealwe mearas, 865.

a-hleapan, _to spring up_: pret. ahleop, 1398.

hleoethu. See hlieth.

hleonian, w. v., _to incline, to hang over_: inf. oeth þaet he ...
fyrgen-beamas ofer harne stan hleonian funde, _till he found mountain-trees
hanging over the gray rocks_, 1416.

hleo, st. m., _shady, protected place; defence, shelter_; figurative
designation of the king, or of powerful nobles: wigendra hleo, of Hroethgar,
429; of Sigemund, 900; of Beowulf, 1973, 2338; eorla hleo, of Hroethgar,
1036, 1867; of Beowulf, 792; of Hygelac, 2191.

hleo-burh, st. f., _ruler's castle_ or _city_: acc. sg., 913, 1732.

hleoethor-cwyde, st. m., _speech of solemn sound, ceremonious words_, 1980.

hleor, st. n., _cheek, jaw_: in comp. faeted-hleor (adj.).

hleor-bera, w. m., _cheek-bearer_, the part of the helmet that reaches down
over the cheek and protects it: acc. pl. ofer hleor-beran (_visor_?), 304.

hleor-bolster, st. m., _cheek-bolster, pillow_: nom. sg., 689.

hleotan, st. v. w. acc., _to obtain by lot, to attain, to get_: pret. sg.
feorh-wunde hleat, 2386.

hlifian, w. v., _to rise, to be prominent_: inf. hlifian, 2806; pret.
hlifade, 81, 1800, 1899.

hlieth, st. n., _cliff, precipice of a mountain_: dat. sg. on hliethe, 3159;
gen. sg. hliethes, 1893; pl. hlietho in composition, stan-hlietho; hleoethu in the
compounds fen-, mist-, naes-, wulf-hleoethu.

hlin-bed (Frisian hlen-bed, Richthofen 206^28, for which another text has
cronk-bed), st. n., [Greek: klinidion], _bed for reclining, sick-bed_: acc.
sg. hlim-bed, 3035.

to-hlidan, st. v., _to spring apart, to burst_: pret. part. nom. pl.
to-hlidene, 1000.

hlud, adj., _loud_: acc. sg. dream ... hludne, 89.

hlyn, st. m., _din, noise, clatter_: nom. sg., 612.

hlynnan, hlynian, w. v., _to sound, to resound_: inf. hlynnan (of the
voice), 2554; of fire, _to crackle_: pret. sg. hlynode, 1121.

hlynsian, w. v., _to resound, to crash_: pret. sg. reced hlynsode, 771.

hlytm, st. m., _lot_: dat. sg. naes þa on hlytme, hwa þaet hord strude, _it
did not depend upon lot who should plunder the hoard_, i.e. its possession
was decided, 3127.

hnah, adj.: 1) _low, inferior_: comp. acc. sg. hnagran, 678; dat. sg.
hnahran rince, _an inferior hero, one less brave_, 953.--2) _familiarly
intimate_: nom. sg. naes hio hnah swa þeah, _was nevertheless not familiarly
intimate_ (with the Geatas, i.e. preserved her royal dignity towards them),
(_niggardly_?), 1930.

hnaegan, w. v. w. acc., (for naegan), _to speak to, to greet_: pret. sg. þaet
he þone wisan wordum hnaegde frean Ingwina, 1319.

ge-hnaegan, w. acc., _to bend, to humiliate, to strike down, to fell_: pret.
sg. ge-hnaegde helle gast, 1275; þaer hyne Hetware hilde gehnaegdon, 2917.

hnitan, st. v., _to dash against, to encounter_, here of the collision of
hostile bands: pret. pl. þonne hniton (hnitan) feethan, 1328, 2545.

hoethma, w. m., _place of concealment, cave_, hence, _the grave_: dat. sg. in
hoethman, 2459.

hof, st. n., _enclosed space, court-yard, estate, manor-house_: acc. sg.
hof (Hroethgar's residence), 312; dat. sg. to hofe sinum (Grendel's home in
the sea), 1508; to hofe (Hygelac's residence), 1975; acc. pl. beorht hofu,
2314; dat. pl. to hofum Geata, 1837.

hogode. See hycgan.

hold, adj., _inclined to, attached to, gracious, dear, true_: nom. sg. w.
dat. of the person, hold weorod frean Scyldinga, _a band well disposed to
the lord of the Scyldings_, 290; mandrihtne hold, 1230; Hygelace waes ...
nefa swyethe hold, _to H. was his nephew_ (Beowulf) _very much attached_,
2171; acc. sg. þurh holdne hige, _from a kindly feeling, with honorable
mind_, 267; holdne wine, 376; holdne, 1980; gen. pl. holdra, 487.

hold. See healdan.

holm, st. m., _deep sea_: nom. sg., 519, 1132, 2139; acc. sg., 48, 633;
dat. sg. holme, 543, 1436, 1915; acc. pl. holmas, 240.--Comp. waeg-holm.

holm-clif, st. n., _sea-cliff_: dat. sg. on þam holm-clife, 1422; from þaem
holmclife, 1636; acc. pl. holm-clifu, 230.

holm-wylm, st. m., _the waves of the sea_: dat. sg. holm-wylme, 2412.

holt, st. n., _wood, thicket, forest._ acc. sg. on holt, 2599; holt,
2847.--Comp.: aesc-, fyrgen-, gar-, Hrefnes-holt.

holt-wudu, st. m., _forest-wood_: 1) of the material: nom. sg., 2341.--2) =
_forest_: acc. sg., 1370.

hord, st. m. and n., _hoard, treasure_: nom. sg., 2284, 3085; beaga hord,
2285; maethma hord, 3012; acc. sg. hord, 913, 2213, 2320, 2510, 2745, 2774,
2956, 3057; sawle hord, 2423; þaet hord, 3127; dat. sg. of horde, 1109; for
horde, _on account of_ (the robbing of) _the hoard_, 2782; haeethnum horde,
2217; gen. sg. hordes, 888.--Comp.: beah-, breost-, word-, wyrm-hord.

hord-aern, st. n., _place in which a treasure is kept, treasure-room_: dat.
hord-aerne, 2832; gen. pl. hord-aerna, 2280.

hord-burh, st. f., _city in which is the treasure_ (of the king's),
_ruler's castle_: acc. sg., 467.

hord-gestreon, st. n., _hoard-treasure, precious treasure_: dat. pl.
hord-gestreonum, 1900; gen. pl. maegen-byrethenne hord-gestreona, _the great
burden of rich treasures_, 3093.

hord-maethethum, st. m., _treasure-jewel, precious jewel_: acc. sg. (-madmum,
MS.), 1199.

hord-wela, w. m., _treasure-riches, abundance of treasures_: acc. sg.
hord-welan, 2345.

hord-weard, st. m., _warder of the treasure, hoard-warden_: 1) of the king:
nom. sg., 1048; acc. sg., 1853.--2) of the drake: nom. sg., 2294, 2303,
2555, 2594.

hord-weorethung, st. f., _ornament out of the treasure, rich ornament_: acc.
sg.--weorethunge, 953.

hord-wyn, st. f., _treasure-joy, joy-giving treasure_: acc. sg. hord-wynne,
2271.

horn, st. m., _horn_: 1) upon an animal: instr. pl. heorot hornum trum,
1370.--2) wind-instrument: nom. sg., 1424; acc. sg., 2944.--Comp. gueth-horn.

horn-boga, w. m., _bow made of horn_: dat. sg. of horn-bogan, 2438.

horn-geap, adj., of great extent between the (stag-)horns adorning the
gables(?): nom. sg. sele ... heah and horn-geap, 82.

horn-reced, st. n., building whose two gables are crowned by the halves of
a stag's antler(?): acc. sg., 705. Cf. Heyne's Treatise on the Hall,
Heorot, p. 44.

hors, st. n., _horse_: nom. sg., 1400.

hociht, adj., _provided with hooks, hooked_: in comp. heoro-hociht.

be-hofian, w. v. w. gen., _to need, to want_: pres. sg. III. nu is se daeg
cumen þat ure man-dryhten maegenes behofaeth godra guethrinca, _now is the day
come when our lord needs the might of strong warriors_, 2648.

on-hohsnian, w. v., _to hinder_: pret. sg. þaet onhohsnode Heminges maeg (on
hohsnod, MS.), 1945.

holinga, adv., _in vain, without reason_, 1077.

be-hon, st. v., _to hang with_: pret. part. helmum behongen, 3140.

hop, st. n., _protected place, place of refuge, place of concealment_, in
the compounds fen-, mor-hop.

hos (Goth, hansa), st. f., _accompanying troop, escort_: instr. sg. maegetha
hose, _with an accompanying train of servingwomen_, 925.

hraeethe, adv., _hastily, quickly, immediately_, 224, 741, 749, 1391, etc.;
hraethe, 1438; hreethe, 992; compar. hraethor, 543.

hran-fix, st. m., _whale_: acc. pl. hron-fixas, 540.

hran-rad, st. f., _whale-road_, i.e. sea: dat. sg. ofer hron-rade, 10.

hra, st. n., _corpse_: nom. sg., 1589.

hra-fyl, st. m., _fall of corpses, killing, slaughter_: acc. sg., 277.

hraedlice, adv., _hastily, immediately_, 356, 964.

hraefn, hrefn, st. m., _raven_: nom. sg. hrefn blaca, _black raven_, 1802;
se wonna hrefn, _the dark raven_, 3025; dat. sg. hrefne, 2449.

hraegl, st. n., _dress, garment, armor_: nom. sg., 1196; gen. sg., hraegles,
1218; gen. pl. hraegla, 454--Comp.: beado-, fyrd-, mere-hraegl.

hreethe. See hraethe.

hreether, st. m., _breast, bosom_ nom. sg. hreether inne weoll _(it surged in
his breast_), 2114; hreether aeethme weoll, 2594; dat. sg. in hreethre, 1152; of
hreethre, 2820.--_Breast_ as the seat of feeling, _heart_: dat. sg. þaet waes
... hreethre hygemeethe, _that was depressing to the heart_ (of the slayer,
Haeethcyn), 2443; on hreethre, 1879, 2329; gen. pl. þurh hreethra gehygd,
2046.--_Breast_ as seat of life: instr. sg. hreethre, parallel with aldre,
1447.

hreether-bealo, st. n., _evil that takes hold on the heart, evil severely
felt_: acc. sg., 1344.

hrefn. See hraefn.

hreeth, st. f., _glory_; in composition, gueth-hreeth; _renown, assurance of
victory_, in sige-hreeth.

hreethe, adj., _renowned in battle_: nom. sg. hreeth (on account of the
following aet, final _e_ is elided, as wenic for wene ic, 442; frofor and
fultum for frofre and fultum, 699; firen ondrysne for firene ondr., 1933),
2576.

hreeth-sigor, st. m., _glorious victory_: dat. sg. hreeth-sigora, 2584.

hremig, adj., _boasting, exulting_: with instr. and gen. huethe hremig, 124;
since hremig, 1883; fraetwum hremig, 2055; nom. pl. nealles Hetware hremge
þorfton (sc. wesan) feethe-wiges, 2365.

on-hreran, w. v., _to excite, to stir up_: pret. part. on-hrered, 549,
2555.

hrea-wic, st. n., _place of corpses_: acc. sg. Geata leode hrea-wic
heoldon, _held the place of corpses_, 1215.

hread, st. f., _ornament_(?), in comp. earm-hread. See hreoethan.

hream, st. m., _noise, alarm_:: nom. sg., 1303.

hreoetha, w. m., _cover_, in the compound bord-hreoetha.

hreoethan, ge-hreoethan, st. v., _to cover, to clothe_; only in the pret. part.
hroden, gehroden, _dressed, adorned_: hroden, 495, 1023; þa waes heal hroden
feonda feorum, _then was the hall covered with the corpses of the enemy_,
1152; ge-hroden golde, _adorned with gold_, 304.--Comp.: beag-,
gold-hroden.

hreoh, hreow, hreo, adj., _excited, stormy, wild, angry, raging; sad,
troubled_: nom. sg. (Beowulf) hreoh and heoro-grim, 1565; þaet þam godan waes
hreow on hreethre, (_that came with violence upon him, pained his heart_),
2329; hreo waeron yetha, _the waves were angry, the sea stormy_, 548; naes him
hreoh sefa, _his mind was not cruel_, 2181; dat. sg. on hreon mode, _of sad
heart_, 1308; on hreoum mode, _angry at heart_, 2582.

hreoh-mod, adj., _of sad heart_, 2133; _angry at heart_, 2297.

hreosan, st. v., _to fall, to sink, to rush_: pret. hreas, 2489, 2832;
pret. pl. hruron, 1075; hie on weg hruron, _they rushed away_, 1431; hruron
him tearas, _tears burst from him_, 1873.

be-hreosan, _to fall from, to be divested of_: pret. part. acc. pl.
fyrn-manna fatu ... hyrstum behrorene, _divested of ornaments_ (from which
the ornaments had fallen away), 2760.

hreow, st. f., _distress, sorrow_: gen. pl. þaet waes Hroethgare hreowa
tornost, _that was to Hroethgar the bitterest of his sorrows_, 2130.

hring, st. m.: 1) _ring_: acc. sg. þone hring, 1203; hring gyldenne, 2810;
acc. pl. hringas, 1196, 1971, 3035; gen. pl. hringa, 1508, 2246.--2) _shirt
of mail_ (of interlaced rings): nom. sg. hring, 1504; byrnan hring,
2261.--Comp. ban-hring.

hringan, w. v., _to give forth a sound, to ring, to rattle_: pret. pl.
byrnan hringdon, 327.

hring-boga, w. m., _one who bends himself into a ring_: gen. sg.
hring-bogan (of the drake, bending himself into a circle), 2562.

hringed, pret. part., _made of rings_: nom. sg. hringed byrne, 1246; acc.
sg. hringde byrnan, 2616.

hringed-stefna, w. m., _ship whose stem is provided with iron rings_
(cramp-irons), especially of sea-going ships (cf. Frieth-þiofs saga, I:
þorsteinn atti skip þat er Ellidi het, ... borethit war spengt iarni): nom.
sg., 32, 1898; acc. sg. hringed-stefnan, 1132.

hring-iren, st. n., _ring-iron, ring-mail_: nom. sg., 322.

hring-mael, adj., _marked with rings_, i.e. ornamented with rings, or marked
with characters of ring-form: nom. acc. sg., of the sword, 1522, 1562(?);
nom. pl. heard and hring-mael Heaethobeardna gestreon (_rich armor_), 2038.

hring-naca, w. m., _ship with iron rings, sea-going ship_: nom. sg., 1863.

hring-net, st. n., _ring-net_, i.e. a shirt of interlaced rings: acc. sg.,
2755; acc. pl. hring-net, 1890.

hring-sele, st. m., _ring-hall_, i.e. hall in which are rings, or in which
rings are bestowed: acc. sg., 2841; dat. sg., 2011, 3054.

hring-weorethung, st. f., _ring-ornament_: acc. sg. -weorethunge, 3018.

hrinan, st. v. w. dat.: 1) _to touch, lay hold of_: inf. þaet him heardra
nan hrinan wolde iren aergod (_that no good sword of valiant men would make
an impression on him_), 989; him for hrof-sele hrinan ne mehte faergripe
flodes (_the sudden grip of the flood might not touch him owing to the
hall-roof_), 1516; þaet þam hring-sele hrinan ne moste gumena aenig _(so that
none might touch the ringed-hall), _3054; pret. sg. siethethan he hire folmum
[hr]an (_as soon as he touched it with his hands_), 723; oeth þaet deaethes wylm
hran aet heortan (_seized his heart_), 2271. Pret. subj. þeah þe him wund
hrine (_although he was wounded_), 2977.--2) (O.N. hrina, _sonare,
clamare), to resound, rustle_: pres. part. nom. pl. hrinde bearwas (for
hrinende) 1364; but see Note.

hroden. See hreoethan.

hron-fix. See hran-fix.

hroethor, st. m., _joy, beneficium_: dat sg. hrefne to hroethre, 2449; gen. pl.
hroethra, 2172.

hrof, st. m., _roof, ceiling of a house_: nom. sg., 1000; acc. sg. under
Heorotes hrof, 403; under geapne hrof, 838; geseah steapne hrof (here
_inner roof, ceiling_), 927; so, ofer heahne hrof, 984; ymb þaes helmes
hrof, 1031; under beorges hrof, 2756.--Comp. inwit-hrof.

hrof-sele, st. m., _covered hall_: dat. sg. hrof-sele, 1516.

hror, adj., _stirring, wide-awake, valorous_: dat. sg. of þaem hroran,
1630.--Comp. fela-hror.

hruron. See hreosan.

hruse, w. f., _earth, soil_: nom. sg., 2248, 2559; acc. sg. on hrusan, 773,
2832; dat. sg. under hrusan, 2412.

hrycg, st. m., _back_: acc. sg. ofer waeteres hrycg (_over the water's back,
surface_), 471.

hryre, st. m., _fall, destruction, ruin_: acc. sg., 3181; dat. sg., 1681,
3006.--Comp.: leod-, wig-hryre.

hrysian, w. v., _to shake, be shaken, clatter_: pret. pl. syrcan hrysedon
(_corselets rattled_, of men in motion), 226.

hund, st. m., _dog_: instr. pl. hundum, 1369.

hund, num., _hundred_: þreo hund, 2279; w. gen. pl. hund missera, 1499;
hund þusenda landes and locenra beaga, 2995.

hu, adv., _how, quomodo_, 3, 116, 279, 738, 845, 2319, 2520, 2719, etc.

hueth, st. f., _booty, plunder_: dat. (instr.) sg. huethe, 124.

huru, adv., _above all, certainly_, 369; _indeed, truly_, 182, 670, 1072,
1466, 1945, 2837; _yet, nevertheless_, 863; _now_, 3121.

hus, st. n., _house_: gen. sg. huses, 116; gen. pl. husa selest (Heorot),
146, 285, 659, 936.

hwan, adv., _whither_: to hwan syethethan weareth hondraes haeleetha (_what issue the
hand-to-hand fight of the heroes had_), 2072.

hwanan, hwanon, adv., _whence_: hwanan, 257, 2404; hwanon, 333.

hwa, interrog. and indef. pron., _who_: nom. sg. m. hwa, 52, 2253, 3127;
neut. hwaet, 173; anes hwaet (_a part only_), 3011; hwaet þa men waeron (_who
the men were_), 233, etc.; hwaet syndon ge searo-haebbendra (_what armed men
are ye?_), 237; acc. sg. m. wieth manna hwone (_from (?) any man_), 155;
neut. þurh hwaet, 3069; hwaet wit geo spraecon, 1477; hwaet ... hynetho (gen.),
faer-nietha (_what shame and sudden woes_), 474; so, hwaet þu worn fela (_how
very much thou_), 530; swylces hwaet, 881; hwaet ... arna, 1187; dat. m.
hwam, 1697.--Comp. aeg-hwa.

hwaet, interj., _what! lo! indeed!_ 1, 943, 2249.

ge-hwa, w. part, gen., _each, each one_: acc. sg. m. wieth feonda gehwone,
294; nietha gehwane, 2398; meca gehwane, 2686; gum-cynnes gehwone, 2766; fem,
on healfa gehwone, 801; dat. sg. m. dogora gehwam, 88; aet nietha gehwam, 883;
þegna gehwam, 2034; eorla gehwaem, 1421; fem. in maegetha ge-hwaere, 25; nihta
gehwaem, 1366; gen. sing. m. manna gehwaes, 2528; fem. daeda gehwaes, 2839.

hwar. See hwaer.

hwaeder. See hwider.

hwaeether, pron., _which of two_: nom. sg. hwaeether ... uncer twega, 2531; swa
hwaeether, _utercunque_: acc. sg. on swa hwaeethere hond swa him gemet þince,
687.--Comp. aeg-hwaeether.

ge-hwaeether, _each of two, either-other_: nom. sg. m. waes gehwaeether oethrum
lifigende laeth, 815; waes ... gehwaeether oethrum hroethra gemyndig, 2172; ne
gehwaeether incer (_nor either of you two_), 584; nom. sg. neut. gehwaeether þara
(_either of them_, i.e. ready for war or peace), 1249; dat. sg. hiora
gehwaeethrum, 2995; gen. sg. bega gehwaeethres, 1044.

hwaeether, hwaeethere, hwaeethre, 1) adv., _yet, nevertheless_: hwaeethre, 555, 891,
1271, 2099, 2299, 2378, etc.; hwaeethre swa þeah, _however, notwithstanding_,
2443; hwaeethere, 574, 578, 971, 1719--2) conj., = _utrum, whether_: hwaeethre,
1315; hwaeether, 1357, 2786.

hwaet, adj., _sharp, bold, valiant_: nom. sg. se secg hwata, 3029; dat. sg.
hwatum, 2162; nom. pl. hwate, 1602, 2053; acc. pl. hwate, 2643,
3006.--Comp.: fyrd-, gold-hwaet.

hwaet. See hwa.

hwaer, adv., _where_: elles hwaer, _elsewhere_, 138; hwaer, _somewhere_, 2030.
In elliptical question: wundur hwar þonne..., _is it a wonder when...?_
3063.--Comp. o-hwaer.

ge-hwaer, _everywhere_: þeah þu heaetho-raesa gehwaer dohte (_everywhere good in
battle_), 526.

hwele. See hwyle.

hwergen, adv., _anywhere_: elles hwergen, _elsewhere_, 2591.

hwettan, w. v., _to encourage, urge_: pres. subj. swa þin sefa hwette (_as
thy mind urges, as thou likest_), 490; pret. pl. hwetton higerofne (_they
whetted the brave one_), 204.

hwene, adv., _a little, paululum_, 2700.

hwealf, st. f., _vault_: acc. sg. under heofones hwealf, 576, 2016.

hweorfan, st. v., _to stride deliberately, turn, depart, move, die_: pres.
pl. þara þe cwice hwyrfaeth, 98; inf. hwilum he on lufan laeteeth hworfan monnes
mod-geþonc (_sometimes on love_ (?) _possessions_ (?) _permits the thoughts
of man to turn_), 1729; londrihtes mot ... monna aeghwylc idel hweorfan (_of
rights of land each one of men must be deprived_), 2889; pret. sg. faeder
ellor hwearf ... of earde (_died_), 55; hwearf þa hraedlice þaer Hroethgar saet,
356; hwearf þa bi bence (_turned then to the bench_), 1189; so, hwearf þa
be wealle, 1574; hwearf geond þaet reced, 1982; hlaew oft ymbe hwearf (_went
oft round the cave_), 2297; nalles aefter lyfte lacende hwearf (_not at all
through the air did he go springing_), 2833; subj. pret. sg, aer he on weg
hwurfe ... of geardum (_died_), 264.

and-hweorfan, _to move against_: pret. sg. oeth þaet ... norethan wind
heaetho-grim and-hwearf (_till the fierce north wind blew in our faces_),
548.

aet-hweorfan, _to go to_: pret. sg. hwilum he on beorh aet-hwearf (_at times
returned to the mountain_), 2300.

ge-hweorfan, _to go, come_: pret. sg. gehwearf þa in Francna faeethm feorh
cyninges, 1211; hit on aeht gehwearf ... Denigea frean, 1680; so, 1685,
2209.

geond-hweorfan, _to go through from end to end_: pres. sg. flet eall
geond-hwearf, 2018.

hwider, adv., _whither_: hwyder, 163; hwaeder (hwaeether, MS.), 1332.

hwil, st. f., _time, space of time_: nom. sg. waes seo hwil micel (_it was a
long time_), 146; þa waes hwil daeges (_the space of a day_), 1496; acc. sg.
hwile, _for a time_, 2138; _a while_, 105, 152; lange (longe) hwile, _a
long while_, 16, 2781; ane hwile, _a while_, 1763; lytle hwile, _brief
space_, 2031, 2098; aenige hwile, _any while_, 2549; laessan hwile, _a lesser
while_, 2572; dat. sg. aer daeges hwile, _before daybreak_, 2321; dat. pl.
nihtes hwilum, _sometimes at night_, 3045. Adv., _sometimes, often_:
hwilum, 175, 496, 917, 1729, 1829, 2017, 2112, etc.; hwilum ... hwilum,
2108-9-10.--Comp.: daeg-, gescaep-, orleg-, sige-hwil.

hwit, adj., _brilliant, flashing_: nom. sg. se hwita helm, 1449.

hworfan. See hweorfan.

hwopan, st. v., _to cry, cry out mourn_: pret. sg. hweop, 2269.

hwyder. See hwider.

hwylc, pron., _which, what, any_: 1) adj.: nom. sg. m. sceaetha ic nat hwylc,
274; fem, hwylc orleghwil, 2003; nom. pl. hwylce Saegeata siethas waeron,
1987.--2) subst., w. gen. pl. nom. m.: Frisna hwylc, 1105; fem, efne swa
hwylc maegetha swa þone magan cende (_whatever woman brought forth this son_),
944; neut. þonne his bearna hwylc (_than any one of his sons_), 2434; dat.
sg. efne swa hwylcum manna swa him gemet þuhte, 3058.--Comp.: aeg-, nat-,
wel-hwylc.

ge-hwylc, ge-hwilc, ge-hwelc, w. gen. pl., _each_: nom. sg. m. gehwylc,
986, 1167, 1674; acc. sg. m. gehwylcne, 937, 2251, 2517; gehwelcne, 148;
fem, gehwylce, 1706; neut. gehwylc, 2609; instr. sg. dogra gehwylce, 1091;
so, 2058, 2451; dat. sg. m. gehwylcum, 412, 769, 785, etc.; fem, ecga
gehwylcre, 806; neut. cynna gehwylcum, 98; gen. sg. m. and neut. gehwylces,
733, 1397, 2095.

hwyrft, st. m., _circling movement, turn_: dat. pl. adv. hwyrftum scriethaeth
(_wander to and fro_), 163.--Comp. ed-hwyrft.

hycgan, w. v., _to think, resolve upon_: pret. sg. ic þaet hogode þaet ...
(_my intention was that ..._), 633.--Comp. w. pres. part.: bealo-, heard-,
swieth-, þanc-, wis-hycgend.

for-hycgan, _to despise, scorn, reject with contempt_: pres. sg. I. ic þaet
þonne for-hicge þaet ..., _reject with scorn the proposition that ..._, 435.

ge-hycgan, _to think, determine upon_: pret. sg. þa þu ... feorr gehogodest
saecce secean, 1989.

ofer-hycgan, _to scorn_: pret. sg. ofer-hogode þa hringa fengel þaet he þone
widflogan weorode gesohte (_scorned to seek the wide-flier with a host_),
2346.

hydig (for hygdig), adj., _thinking, of a certain mind_: comp. an-, bealo-,
grom-, nieth-, þrist-hydig.

ge-hygd, st. n., _thought, sentiment_: acc. sg. þurh hreethra gehygd,
2046.--Comp.: breost-, mod-gehygd, won-hyd.

hyge, hige, st. m., _mind, heart, thought_: nom. sg. hyge, 756; hige, 594;
acc. sg. þurh holdne hige, 267; gen. sg. higes, 2046; dat. pl. higum, 3149.

hyge-bend, st. m. f., _mind-fetter, heart-band_: instr. pl. hyge-bendum
faest, _fast in his mind's fetters, secretly_, 1879.

hyge-geomor, adj., _sad in mind_: nom. sg. hyge-giomor, 2409.

hyge-meethe, adj.: 1) _sorrowful, soul-crushing_: nom. sg., 2443.--2)
_life-weary, dead_: dat. pl. hyge-meethum (-maeethum, MS.), 2910.

hyge-rof, adj., _brave, valiant, vigorous-minded_: nom. sg. [hygerof], 403;
acc. sg. hige-rofne, 204.

hyge-sorh, st. f., _heart-sorrow_: gen. pl. -sorga, 2329.

hyge-þyhtig, adj., _doughty, courageous_: acc. sg. hige-þihtigne (of
Beowulf), 747. See þyhtig.

hyge-þrym, st. m., _animi majestas, high-mindedness_: dat. pl. for
hige-þrymmum, 339.

hyht, st. m., _thought, pleasant thought, hope_ (Dietrich): nom. sg., 179.

ge-hyld (see healdan), st. n., _support, protection_: nom. sg., 3057.--Leo.

hyldan, w. v., _to incline one's self, lie down to sleep_: pret. sg. hylde
hine, _inclined himself, lay down_, 689.

hyldo, st. f., _inclination, friendliness, grace_: acc. sg. hyldo, 2068,
2294; gen. sg. hyldo, 671, 2999.

a-hyrdan, w. v., _harden_: pret. part. a-hyrded, 1461.

hyrde. See hirde.

hyrst, st. f., _accoutrements, ornament, armor_: acc. sg. hyrste
(Ongenþeow's _equipments and arms_), 2989; acc. pl. hyrsta, 3166; instr.
pl. hyrstum, 2763.

hyrstan, w. v., _to deck, adorn_: pret. part. hyrsted sweord, 673; helm
[hyr]sted golde, 2256.

hyrtan, w. v., _to take heart, be emboldened_: pret. sg. hyrte hyne
hord-weard (_the drake took heart_; see 2566, 2568, 2570), 2594.

hyse, st. m., _youth, young man_: nom. sg. as voc., 1218.

hyt. See hit.

hydan, w. v., _to hide, conceal, protect, preserve_: pres. subj. hyde
[hine, _himself_] se þe wylle, 2767; inf. w. acc. no þu minne þearft
hafalan hydan, 446; aer he in wille hafelan [hydan] (_ere in it he_ [the
stag] _will hide his head_), 1373.

ge-hydan, w. acc., _to conceal, preserve_: pret. sg. gehydde, 2236, 3060.

hyeth, st. f., _haven_: dat. sg. aet hyethe, 32.

hyeth-weard, st. m., _haven-warden_: nom. sg., 1915.

hynan (see hean), w. v. w. acc., _to crush, afflict, injure_: pret. sg.
hynde, 2320.

hynethu, st. f., _oppression, affliction, injury_: acc. sg. hynethu, 277; gen.
sg. hwaet ... hynetho, 475; fela ... hynetho, 594; gen. pl. heardra hynetha, 166.

hyran, w. v.: 1) _to hear, perceive, learn_: a) w. inf. or acc. with inf.:
I. pret. sg. hyrde ic, 38, 582, 1347, 1843, 2024; III. sg. þaet he fram
Sigemunde secgan hyrde, 876; I. pl. swa we soethlice secgan hyrdon, 273. b)
w. acc.: naenigne ic ... selran hyrde hordmaethethum (_I heard of no better
hoard-jewel_), 1198. c) w. dependent clause: I. sg. pret. hyrde ic þaet ...,
62, 2164, 2173.--2) w. dat. of person, _to obey_: inf. oeth þaet him aeghwylc
þara ymbsittendra hyran scolde, 10; hyran heaetho-siocum, 2755; Pret. pl. þaet
him winemagas georne hyrdon, 66.

ge-hyran, _to hear, learn_: a) w. acc.: II. pers. sg. pres. minne gehyraeth
anfealdne geþoht, 255; III. sg. pret. gehyrde on Beowulfe faestraedne geþoht,
610. b) w. acc. and inf.: III. pl. pret. gehyrdon, 786. c) w. depend.
clause: I. pres. sg. ic þaet gehyre þaet ..., 290.


I

ic, pers. pron. _I_: acc. mec, dat. me, gen. min; dual nom. wit, acc.
uncit, unc, dat. unc, gen. uncer; pl. nom. we, acc. usic, us, dat. us, gen.
user. ic omitted before the verb, 470.

icge, _gold_ (perhaps related to Sanskrit ic, = dominare, imperare, O.H.G.
eht, _wealth_, opes), _treasure?, sword_ (edge)?, 1108.--Koerner.

ides, st. f., _woman, lady, queen_: nom. sg., 621, 1076, 1118, 1169; dat.
sg. idese, 1650, 1942. Also of Grendel's mother: nom. sg., 1260; gen. sg.
idese, 1352.

in. See inn.

in: I. prep. w. dat. and acc.: 1) w. dat. (local, indicating rest), _in_:
in geardum, 13, 2460; in þaem guethsele, 443; in beorsele, 2636; so, 89, 482,
589, 696, 729, 2140, 2233, etc.; in maegetha gehwaere, 25; in þystrum, 87; in
Caines cynne, 107; in hyra gryregeatwum (_in their accoutrements of terror,
war-weeds_), 324; so, 395; in campe (_in battle_), 2506; hiora in anum (_in
one of them_), 2600. Prep. postpositive: Scedelandum in, 19. Also, _on,
upon_, like on: in ealo-bence, 1030; in gumstole, 1953; in þam wongstede
(_on the grassy plain, the battle-field_), 2787; in baelstede, 3098.
Temporal: in gear-dagum, 1.--2) w. acc. (local, indicating motion), _in,
into_: in woruld, 60; in fyres faeethm, 185; so, 1211; in Hrefnesholt, 2936.
Temporal, _in, at, about, toward_: in þa tide (in watide, MS.), 2228.

II. adv., _in_ (here or there), 386, 1038, 1372, 1503, 1645, 2153, 2191,
2228; inn, 3091.

incge, adj. (perhaps related to icge), instr. sg. incge lafe (_with the
costly sword_ ? or _with mighty sword_?), 2578.--[_Edge_: incge lafe, _edge
of the sword_.--K. Koerner?]

in-frod, adj., _very aged_: nom. sg., 2450; dat. sg. in-frodum, 1875.

in-gang, st. m., _entrance, access to_: acc. sg., 1550.

in-genga, w. m., _in-goer, visitor_: nom. sg., of Grendel, 1777.

in-gesteald, st. m., _house-property, possessions in the house_: acc. sg.,
1156.

inn, st. n., _apartment, house_: nom. sg. in, 1301.

innan, adv., _within, inside_, 775, 1018, 2413, 2720; on innan (_in the
interior_), _within_, 1741, 2716; þaer on innan (_in there_), 71; burgum on
innan (_within his city_), 1969. Also, _therein_: þaer on innan, 2090, 2215,
2245.

innan-weard, adv., _inwards, inside, within_, 992, 1977; inne-weard, 999.

inne, adv.: 1) _inside, within_, 643, 1282, 1571, 2114, 3060; word inne
abead (_called, sent word, in_, i.e. standing in the hall door), 390; _in
it_ (i.e. the battle), 1142; þaer inne (_therein_), 118, 1618, 2116, 2227,
3088.--2) = _insuper, still further, besides_, 1867.

inwit, st. n., _evil, mischief, spite, cunning hostility_, as in

inwit-feng, st. m., _malicious grasp, grasp of a cunning foe_: nom. sg.,
1448.

inwit-gaest, st. m., _evil guest, hostile stranger_: nom. sg., 2671.

inwit-hrof, st. m., _hostile roof, hiding-place of a cunning foe_: acc. sg.
under inwit-hrof, 3124.

inwit-net, st. n., _mischief-net, cunning snare_: acc. sg., 2168.

inwit-nieth, st. n., _cunning hostility, hostile contest_: nom. pl.
inwit-niethas (_hostility through secret attack_), 1859; gen. pl. inwit-nietha,
1948.

inwit-scear, st. m., _massacre through cunning, murderous attack_: acc. sg.
eatolne inwit-scear, 2479.

inwit-searo, st. n., _cunning, artful intrigue_: acc. sg. þurh inwit-searo,
1102. See searo.

inwit-sorh, st. f., _grief, remorse, mourning springing from hostile
cunning_: nom. sg., 1737; acc. sg. inwid-sorge, 832.

inwit-þanc, adj., _ill-disposed, malicious_: dat. sg. he onfeng hraethe
inwit-þancum (_he quickly grasped the cunning-in-mind_ [Grendel]), 749.

irnan (for rinnan), st. v., _to run_: so be-irnan, _to run up to_, occur_:
pret. sg him on mod be-arn (_came into his mind_), 67.

on-irnan, _to open_: pret. sg. duru sona onarn, 722.

irre-mod, adj. See yrre-mod.


I

idel, adj., _empty, bare; deprived of_: nom. sg., 145, 413; w. gen.
lond-rihtes þaere maegburge idel (_deprived of his land-possessions among the
people_ [of the Geatas]), 2889.

idel-hende, adj., _empty-handed_, 2082.

iren, st. n., _iron, sword_: nom. sg. dryhtlic iren (_the doughty, lordly
sword_), 893; iren aer-god, 990; acc. sg. leoflic iren, 1810; gen. pl. irena
cyst (_choicest of swords_), 674; irenna cyst, 803; irenna ecge (_edges of
swords_), 2684.

iren, adj., _of iron_: nom. sg. ecg waes iren, 1460.

iren-bend, st. f., _iron band, bond, rivet_: instr. pl. iren-bendum faest
(bold), 775, 999.

iren-byrne, w. f., _iron corselet_: acc. sg. iren-byrnan, 2987. See
isern-byrne.

iren-heard, adj., _hard as iron_: nom. sg., 1113.

irenne, adj., _of iron_: in comp. eall-irenne.

iren-þreat, st. m., _iron troop, armored band_: nom. sg., 330.

is, st. n., _ice_: dat. sg. ise, 1609.

isern-byrne, w. f., _iron corselet_: acc. sg. isern-byrnan, 672. See
iren-byrne.

isern-scur, st. f., _iron shower, shower of arrows_: gen. sg. þone þe oft
gebad isern-scure, 3117.

is-gebind, st. n., _fetters of ice_: instr. sg. is-gebinde, 1134.

isig, adj., _shining, brilliant_ (like brass): nom. sg. isig (said of a
vessel covered with plates(?) of metal), 33.--Leo.

IO IU

iu. See geo.

iu-man. See geo-man.

io-meowle. See geo-meowle.


L

laethu, st. f., _invitation_.--Comp.: freond-, neod-laethu.

ge-lafian, w. v. w. acc. pers. and instr. of the thing, _to refresh, lave_:
pret. sg. wine-dryhten his waetere gelafede, 2723.

lagu, st. m., _lake, sea_: nom. sg., 1631.

lagu-craeftig, adj., _acquainted with the sea_: nom. sg. lagu-craeftig mon
(_pilot_), 209.

lagu-straet, st. f., _path over the sea_: acc. sg. ofer lagu-straete, 239.

lagu-stream, st. m., _sea-current, flood_: acc. pl. ofer lagu-streamas,
297.

land, st. n., _land_: nom. sg. lond, 2198; acc. sg. land, 221, 2063; lond,
2472, 2493; land Dena, 242, 253; lond Brondinga, 521; Finna land, 580; dat.
sg. on lande (_in the land_), 2311, 2837; _at near, land, shore_, 1914; to
lande (_to the land, ashore_), 1624; gen. sg. landes, 2996; gen. pl. ofer
landa fela (_over much country, space; afar_), 31l.--Comp.: el-, ea-land.

land-buend, part, pres., terricola, _inhabitant of the land_: nom. pl.
lond-buend, 1346; dat. pl. land-buendum, 95.

land-fruma, w. m., _ruler, prince of the country_: nom. sg., 31.

land-gemyrcu, st. n. pl., _frontier, land-mark_: acc. pl., 209.

land-geweorc, st. n., _land-work, fortified place_: acc. sg. leoda
land-geweorc, 939. See weorc, geweorc.

land-riht, st. n., _prerogatives based upon land-possessions, right to
possess land_, hence _real estate_ itself: gen. sg. lond-rihtes idel, 2887.

land-waru, st. f., _inhabitants, population_: acc. pl. land-wara, 2322.

land-weard, st. m., _guard, guardian of the frontier_: nom. sg., 1891.

lang, long, adj., _long_: 1) temporal: nom. sg. to lang, 2094; naes þa long
(lang) to þon (_not long after_), 2592, 2846; acc. sg. lange hwile (_for a
long time_), 16, 2160, 2781; longe (lange) þrage, 54, 114, 1258; lange tid,
1916. Compar. nom. sg. lengra fyrst, 134.--2) local, nom. sg. se waes
fiftiges fotgemearces lang, 3044.--Comp.: and-, morgen-, niht-, up-lang.

lange, longe, adv., _long_: lange, 31, 1995, 2131, 2345, 2424; longe, 1062,
2752, 3109; to lange (_too long, excessively long_), 906, 1337, 1749.
Compar. leng, 451, 1855, 2802, 3065; no þy leng (_none the longer_), 975.
Superl. lengest (_longest_), 2009, 2239.

ge-lang, adj., _extending, reaching to something_ or _somebody_, hence
_ready, prepared_: nu is raed gelang eft aet þe anum (_now is help [counsel]
at hand in thee alone_), 1377; gen is eall aet þe lissa gelong (_all of
favor is still on thee dependent, is thine_), 2151. See ge-lenge.

lang-ge-streon, st. n., _long-lasting treasure_: gen. pl. long-gestreona,
2241.--Leo.

langian, w. v., reflex, w. dat, _to long, yearn_: pres. sg. III. him
...aefter deorum men dyrne langaeth beorn (_the hero longeth secretly after
the dear man_), 1880.

lang-sum, adj., _long-lasting, continuing_: nom. sg. longsum, 134, 192,
1723; acc. sg. long-sumne, 1537.

lang-twidig, adj., _long-granted, assured_: nom. sg., 1709.

lata, w. m., _a lazy, cowardly one_; in comp. hild-lata.

la, interj., _yes! indeed!_ 1701, 2865.

lac, st. n.: 1) _measured movement, play_: in comp. beadu-, heaetho-lac.--2)
_gift, offering_: acc. pl. lac, 1864; laethlicu lac (_loathly offering,
prey_), 1585; dat. pl. lacum, 43, 1869.--Comp. sae-lac.

ge-lac, st. n., _sport, play_: acc. pl. sweorda gelac (_battle_), 1041;
dat. pl. aet ecga gelacum, 1169.

lacan, st. v., _to move in measured time, dancing, playing, fighting,
flying_, etc.: inf. dareethum lacan (_fight_), 2849; part. pres. aefter lyfte
lacende (_flying through the air_), 2833.

for-lacan, _to deceive, betray_: part, pret. he weareth on feonda geweald
foreth forlacen (_deceitfully betrayed into the enemy's hands_), 904.

lad, st. f., _street, way, journey_: dat. sg. on lade, 1988; gen. sg. lade,
569.--Comp.: brim-, sae-lad.

ge-lad, st. n., _way, path, road_: acc. sg. uncueth gelad, 1411.

laeth, adj., _loathly, evil, hateful, hostile_: nom. sg. laeth, 816; laeth
lyft-floga, 2316; laeth (_enemy_), 440; ne leof ne laeth, 511; neut. laeth, 134,
192; in weak form, se laetha (of the dragon), 2306; acc. sg. laethne (wyrm),
3041; dat. sg. laethum, 440, 1258; gen. sg. laethes (of the enemy), 842; fela
laethes (_much evil_), 930; so, 1062; laethan liges, 83; laethan cynnes, 2009,
2355; þaes laethan (of the enemy), 132; acc. pl. neut. laeth gewidru (_hateful
storms_), 1376; dat. instr. pl. wieth laethum, 550; laethum scuccum and scinnum,
939; laethum daedum (_with evil deeds_), 2468; laethan fingrum, 1506; gen. pl.
laethra manna, spella, 2673, 3030; laethra (_the enemy_), 242. Compar. nom. sg.
laethra ... beorn, 2433.

laeth-bite, st. m., _hostile bite_: dat. sg. laeth-bite lices (_the body's
hostile bite_ = the wound), 1123.

laeth-geteona, w. m., _evil-doer, injurer_: nom. sg., 975; nom. pl.
laeth-geteonan, 559.

laeth-lic, adj., _loathly, hostile_: acc. pl. laeth-licu, 1585.

laf, st. f.: 1) _what is left, relic; inheritance, heritage, legacy_: nom.
sg. Hreethlan laf (Beowulf's corselet), 454; nom. pl. fela lafe (_the
leavings of files_ = swords, Grein), 1033; so, homera lafe, 2830; on him
gladiaeth gomelra lafe, heard and hringmael Heaethobeardna gestreon (_on him
gleams the forefather's bequest, hard and ring-decked, the Heaethobeardas'
treasure_, i.e. the equipments taken from the slain king of the
Heaethobeardas), 2037; acc. sg. sweorda lafe (_leavings of the sword_, i.e.
those spared by the sword), 2937.--2) _the sword as a specially precious
heir-loom_: nom. sg., 2629; acc. sg. lafe, 796, 1489, 1689, 2192, 2564;
instr. sg. incge lafe, 2578.--Comp.: ende-, eormen-, wea-, yrfe-, yeth-laf.

lar, st. f., _lore, instruction, prescription_: dat. sg. be faeder lare,
1951; gen. pl. lara, 1221; larena, 269.--Comp. freond-lar.

last, st. m., _footstep, track_: acc. sg. last, 132, 972, 2165; on last
(_on the traces of, behind_), 2946; nom. pl. lastas, 1403; acc. pl. lastas,
842.--Comp.: feethe-, feorh-, fot-, wraec-last.

laeger. See leger.

lager-bed, st. n., _bed to lie on_ : instr. sg. leger-bedde, 1008.

laes, adj., _less_, 1947; þy laes (_the less_), 487; conjunct, _that not,
lest_, 1919.

laessa, adj., _less, fewer_: nom. sg. laessa, 1283; acc. sg. m. laessan, 43;
fem, laessan hwile, 2572; dat. sg. for laessan (_for less, smaller_), 952.
Superl. nom. sg. no þaet laesest waes hond-gemot[a], 2355.

laet, adj., _negligent, neglectful_; w. gen.: nom. sg. elnes laet, 1530.

laedan, w. v. w. acc.: _to lead, guide, bring_: inf. laedan, 239; pret. pl.
laeddon, 1160.

for-1aedan, _to mislead_: pret. pl. for-laeddan, 2440 (?).

ge-laedan, _lead, bring_: part. pret. ge-laeded, 37.

laefan, w. v.: 1), _to bequeathe, leave_: imper. sg. þinum magum laef folc
and rice, 1179; pret. sg. eaferum laefde ... lond and leodbyrig, 2471.--2)
_spare, leave behind_: aht cwices laefan (_to spare aught living_), 2316.

laen-dagas, st. m. pl., _loan-days, transitory days_ (of earthly existence
as contrasted with the heavenly, unending): acc. pl. laen-dagas, 2592; gen.
pl. laen-daga, 2342.

laene, adj., _inconstant, perishable, evanescent, given over to death or
destruction_: nom. sg., 1755, 3179; acc. sg. of rust-eaten treasures, 3130;
þas laenan gesceaft (_this fleeting life_), 1623; gen. sg. laenan lifes,
2846.

laeran, w. v., _to teach, instruct_: imper. sg. þu þe laer be þon (_learn
this, take this to heart_), 1723.

ge-laeran, _to teach, instruct, give instruction_: inf. ic þaes Hroethgar maeg
... raed gelaeran (_I can give H. good advice about this_), 278; so, 3080;
pret. pl. þa me þaet ge-laerdon leode mine (_gave me the advice_), 415.

laestan, w. v.: 1) _to follow, to sustain, serve_: inf. þaet him se lic-homa
laestan nolde (_that his body would not sustain him_), 813.--2) _perform_:
imper. laest eall tela (_do all well_), 2664.

ge-laestan: 1) _to follow, serve_: pret. sg. (sweord) þaet mec aer and oft
gelaeste, 2501.--2) _to fulfil, grant_: subj. pres. pl. þaet ... wilgesiethas,
þonne wig cume, leode gelaestan (_render war service_), 24; inf. ic þe sceal
mine gelaestan freode (_shall grant thee my friendship, be grateful_), 1707;
pret. sg. beot ... gelaeste (_fulfilled his boast_), 524; gelaeste swa (_kept
his word_), 2991; pres. part. haefde East-Denum ... gilp gelaested (_had
fulfilled for the East Danes his boast_), 830.

laetan, st. v., _to let, allow_, w. acc. and inf.: pres. sg. III. laeteeth,
1729; imper. pl. II. laetaeth, 397; sg. II. laet, 1489; pret. sg. let, 2390,
2551, 2978, 3151(?); pret. pl. leton, 48, 865, 3133; subj. pret. sg. II.
lete, 1997; sg. III. lete, 3083.

a-laetan: 1) _to let, allow_: subj. pres. sg. II. þaet þu ne alaete ... dom
ge-dreosan, 2666.--2) _to leave, lay aside_: inf. alaetan laen-dagas (_die_)
2592; so, alaetan lif and leodscipe, 2751.

for-laetan: 1) _to let, permit_, w. acc. and inf.: pret. sg. for-let, 971;
pret. pl. for-leton, 3168. Also with inf. omitted: inf. nolde eorla hleo
... þone cwealmcuman cwicne (i.e. wesan) forlaetan (_would not let the
murderous spirit go alive_), 793.--2) _to leave behind, leave_: pret. sg.
in þam wong-stede ... þaer he hine aer forlet (_where he had previously left
him_), 2788.

of-laetan, _to leave, lay aside_: pres. sg. II. gyf þu aer þonne he worold
oflaetest (_leavest the world, diest_), 1184; so pret. sg. oflet lif-dagas
and þas laenan gesceaft, 1623.

on-laetan, _to release, liberate_: pres. sg. III. þonne forstes bend faeder
on-laeteeth (_as soon as the Father looseth the frost's fetters_), 1610.

a-lecgan, w. v.: 1) _to lay, lay down_: pret. sg. syethethan hilde-deor hond
a-legde ... under geapne hrof, 835; þaet he on Beowulfes bearm a-legde
(_this_ [the sword] _he laid in B.'s bosom, presented to him_), 2195; pret.
pl. a-ledon þa leofne þeoden ... on bearm scipes, 34; a-legdon þa to middes
maerne þeoden _(laid the mighty prince in the midst_ [of the pyre]),
3142.--2) _to lay aside, give up_: siethethan ... in fen-freoetho feorh a-legde
(_laid down his life, died_), 852; nu se here-wisa hleahtor a-legde, gamen
and gleo-dream _(now the war-chief has left laughter_, etc.), 3021.

leger, st. n., _couch, bed, lair_: dat. sg. on legere, 3044.

lemian, w. v., _to lame, hinder, oppress_: pret. sg. (for pl.) hine
sorh-wylmas lemede to lange, 906. MS.

leng. See lang.

lenge, adj., _extending along_ or _to, near_ (of time): nom. sg. neut. ne
waes hit lenge þa gen (_nor was it yet long_), 83.

ge-lenge, adj., _extending, reaching to, belonging_: nom. sg. yrfe-weard
... lice gelenge (_an heir belonging to one's body_), 2733.

let, st. m., _place of rest, sojourn?_ in comp. eo-let (_voyage?_).

lettan, w. v., _to hinder_: pret. pl. (acc. pers. and gen. thing), þaet
syethethan na ... brim-liethende lade ne letton (_might no longer hinder
seafarers from journeying_), 569.

a-ledon. See a-lecgan.

leg, st. m., _flame, fire_: nom. sg. wonna leg (_the lurid flame_), 3116;
swogende leg, 3146; dat. sg. for dracan lege, 2550. See lig.

leg-draca, w. m., _fire-drake, flaming dragon_: nom. sg., 3041.

*leahan, lean, st. v. w. acc. _to scold, blame_: pres. sg. III. lyheth, 1049;
pret. sg. log, 1812; pret. pl. logon, 203, 863.

be-lean, _to dissuade, prevent_: inf. ne inc aenig mon ... belean mihte
sorhfullne sieth (_no one might dissuade you twain from your difficult
journey_), 511.

leahtre. See or-leahtre.

leaf, st. n., _leaf, foliage_: instr. pl. leafum, 97.

leafnes-word, st. n., _permission, leave_: acc. pl., 245.

lean. See leahan.

lean, st. n., _reward, compensation_: acc. sg., 114, 952, 1221, 1585, 2392;
dat. sg. leane, 1022. Often in the pl.: acc. þa lean, 2996; dat. þam
leanum, 2146; gen. leana, 2991.--Comp.: and-, ende-lean.

lean (for laen, O.H.G. lehan), st. n, _loan_, 1810.

leanian, w. v., _to reward, compensate_: pres. sg. I. ic þe þa faehethe feo
leanige (_repay thee for the contest with old-time treasures_), 1381; pret.
sg. me þone wael-raes wine Scyldinga faettan golde fela leanode (_the friend
of the Scyldings rewarded me richly for the combat with plated gold_),
2103.

leas, adj., _false_: nom. pl. lease, 253.

leas, adj., _deprived of, free from_, w. gen.: nom. sg. dreama leas, 851;
dat. sg. winigea leasum, 1665.--Comp.: dom-, dream-, ealdor-, feoh-,
feormend-, hlaford-, sawol-, sige-, sorh-, tir-, þeoden-, wine-, wyn-leas.

leasig, adj., _concealing one's self_; in comp. sin-leasig(?).

leoetho-craeft, st. m., _the art of weaving_ or _working in meshes, wire_,
etc.: instr. pl. segn eall-gylden ... gelocen leoetho-craeftum (_a banner all
hand-wrought of interlaced gold_), 2770.

leoetho-syrce, w. f., _shirt of mail (limb-sark)_: acc. sg. locene
leoetho-syrcan (_locked linked sark_), 1506; acc. pl. locene leoetho-syrcan,
1891.

leomum. See lim.

leornian, w. v., _to learn, devise, plan_: pret. him þaes gueth-cyning ...
wraece leornode (_the war-king planned vengeance therefor_), 2337.

leod, st. m., _prince_: nom. sg., 341, 348, 670, 830, 1433, 1493, 1613,
1654, etc.; acc. leod, 626.

leod, st. f., _people_: gen. sg. leode, 597, 600, 697. In pl. indicates
_individuals, people, kinsmen_: nom. pl. leode, 362, 415, 1214, 2126, etc.;
gum-cynnes Geata leode (_people of the race of the Geatas_), 260; acc. pl.
leode, 192, 443, 1337, 1346, etc.; dat. pl. leodum, 389, 521, 619, 698,
906, 1160, etc.; gen. pl. leoda, 205, 635, 794, 1674, 2034, etc.

leod-bealo, st. n., (_mischief, misfortune affecting an entire people_),
_great, unheard-of calamity_: acc. sg., 1723; gen. pl. leod-bealewa, 1947.

leod-burh, st. f., _princely castle, stronghold of a ruler, chief city_:
acc. pl. -byrig, 2472.

leod-cyning, st. m., _king of the people_: nom. sg., 54.

leod-fruma, w. m., _prince of the people, ruler_: acc. sg. leod-fruman,
2131.

leod-gebyrgea, w. m., _protector of the people, prince_: acc. sg.
-gebyrgean, 269.

leod-hryre, st. m., _fall, overthrow, of the prince, ruler_: dat. sg. aefter
leod-hryre (_after the fall of the king of the Heaethobeardas_, Froda, cf.
2051), 2031; gen. sg. þaes leod-hryres (of the fall of Heardred, cf. 2389),
2392.

leod-sceaetha, w. m., _injurer of the people_: dat. sg. þam leod-sceaethan,
2094.

leod-scipe, st. m., _the whole nation, people_: acc. sg., 2752; dat. sg. on
þam leod-scipe, 2198.

leoeth, st. n., _song, lay_: nom. sg., 1160.--Comp.: fyrd-, gryre-, gueth-,
sorh-leoeth.

leof, adj., _lief, dear_: nom. sg., 31, 54, 203, 511, 521, 1877, 2468; weak
form m., leofa, 1217, 1484, 1855, 2664; acc. sg. m. leofne, 34, 297, 619,
1944, 2128, 3109, 3143; gen. sg. leofes (m.), 1995, 2081, 2898; (neut.),
1062, 2911; dat. pl. leofum, 1074; gen. pl. leofra, 1916. Compar. nom. sg.
neut. leofre, 2652. Superl. nom. sg. m. leofost, 1297; acc. sg. þone
leofestan, 2824.

leoflic, _dear, precious, valued_: nom. sg. m. leoflic lind-wiga, 2604;
acc. sg. neut. leoflic iren, 1810.

leogan, st. v., _to lie, belie, deceive_. subj. pres. naefne him his wlite
leoge (_unless his looks belie him_), 250; pret. sg. he ne leag fela wyrda
ne worda, 3030.

a-leogan, _to deceive, leave unfulfilled_: pret. sg. he beot ne a-leh (_he
left not his promise unfulfilled_), 80.

ge-leogan, _to deceive, betray_: pret. sg. him seo wen geleah (_hope
deceived him_), 2324.

leoht, st. n., _light, brilliance_: nom. sg., 569, 728, 1751 (?); acc. sg.
sunnan leoht, 649; godes leoht geceas (_chose God's light, died_), 2470;
dat. sg. to leohte, 95.--Comp.: aefen-, fyr-, morgen-leoht.

leoht, adj., _luminous, bright_: instr. sg. leohtan sweorde, 2493.

leoma, w. m.: 1) _light, splendor_: nom. sg., 311, 2770; acc. sg. leoman,
1518; sunnan and monan leoman (_light of sun and moon_), 95.--2) (as beadu-
and hilde-leoma), _the glittering sword_: nom. sg. lixte se leoma (_the
blade-gleam flashed_), 1571.

leosan, st. v., = amitti, in

be-leosan, _to deprive, be deprived of_: pres. part. (heo) weareth beloren
leofum bearnum and broethrum (_was deprived of her dear children and
brethren_), 1074.

for-leosan, with dat. instr., _to lose something_: pret. sg. þaer he dome
for-leas, ellen-maerethum (_there lost he the glory, the repute, of his heroic
deeds_), 1471; pret. sg. for pl. þam þe aer his elne for-leas (_to him who,
before, had lost his valor_), 2862; part. pret. nealles ic þam leanum
for-loren haefde (_not at all had I lost the rewards_), 2146.

libban, w. v., _to live, be, exist_: pres. sing. III. lifaeth, 3169; lyfaeth,
945; leofaeth, 975, 1367, 2009; subj. pres. sg. II. lifige, 1225; pres. part.
lifigende, 816, 1954, 1974, 2063; dat. sg. be þe lifigendum (_in thy
lifetime_), 2666; pret. sg. lifde, 57, 1258; lyfde, 2145; pret. pl. lifdon,
99. See unlifigende.

licgan, st. v.: 1) _to lie, lie down_ or _low_: pres. sg. nu seo hand ligeeth
(_now the hand lies low_), 1344; nu se wyrm ligeeth, 2746, so 2904; inf.
licgan, 3130; licgean, 967, 3083; pret. sg. laeg, 40, 552, 2078; syethethan
Heardred laeg (_after Heardred had fallen_), 2389; pret. pl. lagon, 3049;
laegon, 566.--2) _to lie prostrate, rest, fail_: pret. sg. naefre on ore laeg
wid-cuethes wig (_never failed the far-famed one's valor at the front_),
1042; syethethan wiether-gyld laeg (_after vengeance failed_, or, _when Withergyld
lay dead_, if _W._ is a proper name), 2052.

a-licgan, _to succumb, fail, yield_: inf. 2887; pret. sg. þaet his dom a-laeg
(_that its power failed it_), 1529.

ge-licgan, _to rest, lie still_: pret. sg. wind-blond gelaeg, 3147.

lida, w. m., _boat, ship_ (as in motion); in comp.: sund-, yeth-lida.

lid-man, st. m., _seafarer, sailor_: gen. pl. lid-manna, 1624.

lim, st. n., _limb, branch_: instr. pl. leomum, 97.

limpan, st. v., _to happen, befall_ (well or ill); impers. w. dat. pret.
sg. hu lomp eow on lade (_how went it with you on the journey?_), 1988.

a-limpan, _to come about, offer itself_: pret. sg. oeth þaet sael a-lamp (_till
the opportunity presented itself_), 623; pret. part, þa him a-lumpen waes
wistfylle wen (_since a hope of a full meal had befallen him_), 734.

be-limpan, _to happen to, befall_: pret. sg. him sio sar belamp, 2469.

ge-limpan, _to happen, occur, turn out_: pres. sg. III. hit eft gelimpeeth
þaet..., 1754; subj. pres. þisse ansyne alwealdan þanc lungre gelimpe
(_thanks to the Almighty forthwith for this sight!_), 930; pret. sg. him on
fyrste gelamp þaet..., 76; swa him ful-oft gelamp (_as often happened to
them_), 1253; þaes þe hire se willa gelamp þaet ... (_because her wish had
been fulfilled_), 627; frofor eft gelamp sarig-modum, 2942; subj. pret. gif
him þyslicu þearf gelumpe, 2638; pret. part. Denum eallum weareth ... willa
gelumpen, 825.

lind, st. f. (properly _linden_; here, a a wooden shield covered with
linden-bark or pith): nom. sg., 2342; acc. sg. geolwe linde, 2611; acc. pl.
linde, 2366.

lind-gestealla, w. m., _shield-comrade, war-comrade_: nom. sg., 1974.

lind-haebbend, pres. part., _provided with a shield_, i.e. warrior: nom. pl.
-haebbende, 245; gen. pl. haebbendra, 1403.

lind-plega, w. m., _shield-play_, i.e. battle: dat. sg. lind-plegan, 1074,
2040.

lind-wiga, w. m., _shield-fighter, warrior_: nom. sg., 2604.

linnan, st. v., _to depart, be deprived of_: inf. aldre linnan (_depart
from life_), 1479; ealdres linnan, 2444.

lis, st. f., _favor, affection_: gen. pl. eall ... lissa, 2151.

list, st. m., _art, skill, cleverness, cunning_: dat. pl. adverbial, listum
(_cunningly_), 782.

lixan, w. v., _to shine, flash_: pret. sg. lixte, 311, 485, 1571.

lic, st. n.: 1) _body, corpse_: nom. sg., 967; acc. sg. lic, 2081; þaet lic
(_the body, corpse_), 2128; dat. sg. lice, 734, 1504, 2424, 2572, 2733,
2744; gen. sg. lices, 451, 1123.-- 2) _form, figure_: in comp. eofor-,
swin-lic.

ge-lic, adj., _like, similar_: nom. pl. m. ge-lice, 2165. Superl.
ge-licost, 218, 728, 986, 1609.

lic-hama, -homa, w. m. _(body-home, garment), body_: nom. sg. lic-homa,
813, 1008, 1755; acc. sg. lic-haman, 2652; dat. sg. lic-haman, 3179.

lician, w. v., _to please, like_ (impers.): pres. sg. III. me þin mod-sefa
licaeth leng swa wel, 1855; pret. pl. þam wife þa word wel licodon, 640.

licnes. See on-licnes.

lic-sar, st. n., _bodily pain_: acc. sg. lic-sar, 816.

lic-syrce, w. f., _body-sark, shirt of mail covering the body_: nom. sg.,
550.

1iethan, st. v., _to move, go_: pres. part. nom. pl. þa liethende (_navigantes,
sailors_), 221; þa waes sund liden (_the water was then traversed_),
223.--Comp.: heaethu-, mere-, waeg-liethend.

liethe (O.H.G. lindi), adj., _gentle, mild, friendly_: nom. sg. w. instr.
gen. lara liethe, 1221. Superl. nom. sg. liethost, 3184.

lieth-waege, st. n., _can in which lieth_ (a wine-like, foaming drink) _is
contained_: acc. sg., 1983.

lif, st. n., _life_: acc. sg. lif, 97, 734, 1537, 2424, 2744, 2752; dat.
sg. life, 2572; to life (_in one's life, ever_) 2433; gen. sg. lifes, 197,
791, 807, 2824, 2846; worolde lifes (_of the earthly life_), 1388,
2344.--Comp. edwit-lif.

lif-bysig, adj. _(striving for life or death), weary of life, in torment of
death_: nom. sg., 967.

lif-dagas, st. m. pl., _lifetime_: acc.-dagas, 794, 1623.

lif-frea, w. m., _lord of life, God_: nom. sg., 16.

lif-gedal, st. n., _separation from life_: nom. sg., 842.

lif-gesceaft, st. f., _fate, destiny_: gen. pl.-gesceafta, 1954, 3065.

lif-wraethu, st. f., _protection for one's life, safety_: acc. sg. lif-wraethe,
2878; dat. sg. to lif-wraethe, 972.

lif-wyn, st. f., _pleasure, enjoyment, joy_ (of life): gen. pl. lif-wynna,
2098.

lig, st. m. n., _flame, fire_: nom. sg., 1123; dat. instr. sg. lige, 728,
2306, 2322, 2342; gen. sg. liges, 83, 782. See leg.

lig-draca, w. m., _ fire-drake, flaming dragon_; nom. pl., 2334. See
leg-draca.

lig-egesa, w. m., _horror arising through fire, flaming terror_: acc. sg.,
2781.

lige-torn, st. m., _false, pretended insult_ or _injury, fierce anger_(?):
dat. sg. aefter lige-torne _(on account of a pretended insult?_ or _fierce
anger?_ cf. Bugge in Zacher's Zeits. 4, 208), 1944.

lig-yeth, st. m., _wave of fire_: instr. pl. lig-yethum, 2673.

leon, st. v., _to lend_: pret. sg. þaet him on þearfe lah þyle Hroethgares
(_which H.'s spokesman lent him in need_), 1457.

on-leoon, _to lend, grant as a loan_, with gen. of thing and dat. pers.:
pret. sg. þa he þaes waepnes on-lah selran sweord-frecan, 1468.

loca, w. m., _bolt, lock_: in comp. ban-, burh-loca.

locen. See lucan.

lond, long. See land, lang.

lof, st. m. n., _praise, repute_: acc. sg. lof, 1537.

lof-daed, st. f., _deed of praise_: instr. pl. lof-daedum, 24.

lof-georn, adj., _eager for praise, ambitious_: superl. nom. sg.
lof-geornost, 3184.

loga, w. m., _liar_; in comp. treow-loga.

losian, w. v., _to escape, flee_: pres. sg. III. losaeth, 1393, 2063; pret.
sg. he on weg losade (_fled away_), 2097.

locian, w. v., _to see, look at_: pres. sg. II. sae-lac ... þe þu her to
locast (_booty of the sea that thou lookest on_), 1655.

ge-lome, adv., _often, frequently_, 559.

lufe, w. f., _love_: in comp. heah-, mod-, wif-lufe.

lufa (cf. and-leofa, big-leofa, _nourishment_), w. m., _food, subsistence;
property, real estate_: acc. sg. on lufan (_on possessions_), 1729.--Comp.
eard-lufa.

lufen, st. f. (cf. lufa), _subsistence, food; real estate, (enjoyment?)_:
nom. sg. lufen (parallel with eethel-wyn), 2887.

luf-tacen, st. n., _love-token_: acc. pl. luf-tacen, 1864.

lufian, w. v., _to love, serve affectionately_: pret. sg. III. lufode þa
leode (_was on affectionate terms with the people_), 1983.

lungre, adv.: 1) _hastily, quickly, forthwith_, 930, 1631, 2311, 2744.--2)
_quite, very, fully_: feower mearas lungre gelice (_four horses quite
alike_), 2165.

lust, st. m., _pleasure, joy_: dat. pl. adv. lustum (_joyfully_), 1654; so,
on lust, 619, cf. 600.

lucan, st. v., _to twist, wind, lock, interweave_: pret. part. acc. sg. and
pl. locene leoetho-syrcan (_shirt of mail wrought of meshes or rings
interlocked_), 1506, 1891; gen. pl. locenra beaga (_rings wrought of gold
wire_), 2996.

be-lucan: 1) _to shut, close in or around_: pret. sg. winter yethe be-leac
is-gebinde (_winter locked the waves with icy bond_), 1133.-- 2) _to shut
in, off, preserve, protect_: pret. sg. I. hig wige beleac manegum maegetha (_I
shut them in, protected them, from war arising from many a tribe_), 1771.
Cf. me wige beluc wraethum feondum (_protect me against mine enemies_), Ps.
34, 3.

ge-lucan, _to unite, link together, make_: pret. part. gelocen, 2770.

on-lucan, _to unlock, open_: pret. sg. word-hord on-leac (_opened the
word-hoard, treasure of speech_), 259.

to-lucan, _(to twist, wrench, in two) to destroy_: inf., 782.

lyft, st. f. (m. n.?), _air_: nom. sg., 1376; dat. sg. aefter lyfte (_along,
through, the air_), 2833.

lyft-floga, w. m., _air-flier_: nom. sg. (of the dragon), 2316.

lyft-geswenced, pret. part., _urged, hastened on, by the wind_, 1914.

lyft-wyn, st. f., _enjoyment of the air_: acc. sg. lyft-wynne, 3044.

lyheth. See leahan.

lystan, w. v., _to lust after, long for_: pret. sg. Geat ungemetes wel ...
restan lyste(_the Geat_ [Beowulf] _longed sorely to rest_), 1794.

lyt, adj. neut. (= parum), _little, very little, few_: lyt eft becwom ...
hames niosan (_few escaped homeward_), 2366; lyt aenig (_none at all_),
3130; usually with gen.: wintra lyt, 1928; lyt ... heafod-maga, 2151;
wergendra to lyt (_too few defenders_), 2883; lyt swigode niwra spella (_he
kept to himself little, none at all, of the new tidings_), 2898; dat. sg.
lyt manna (_too few of men_), 2837.

lytel, adj., _small, little_: nom. sg. neut. to lytel, 1749; acc. sg. f.
lytle hwile (_a little while_), 2031, 2098; lif-wraethe lytle (_little
protection for his life_), 2878.--Comp. un-lytel.

lyt-hwon, adv., _little = not at all_: lyt-hwon logon, 204.

lyfe, st. n., _leave, permission, (life?)_: instr. sg. þine lyfe (life,
MS.), 2132.--Leo. Cf. O.N. leyfi, n., _leave, permission_, in Moebius'
Glossary, p. 266.

lyfan, w. v., (fundamental meaning _to believe, trust_) in

a-lyfan, _to allow, grant, entrust_: pret. sg. naefre ic aenegum men aer
alyfde ... þryeth-aern Dena (_never before to any man have I entrusted the
palace of the Danes_), 656; pret. part. (þa me waes) sieth ... alyfed inn
under eoreth-weall (_the way in under the wall of earth was allowed me_),
3090.

ge-lyfan, w. v., _to believe, trust_: 1) w. dat.: inf. þaer gelyfan sceal
dryhtnes dome se þe hine deaeth nimeeth (_whomever death carrieth away, shall
believe it to be the judgment of God_, i.e. in the contest between Beowulf
and Grendel), 440.--2) w. acc.: pret. sg. geoce gelyfde brego Beorht-Dena
(_believed in, expected, help_, etc.), 609; þaet heo on aenigne eorl gelyfde
fyrena frofre (_that she at last should expect from any earl comfort, help,
out of these troubles_), 628; se þe him bealwa to bote gelyfde (_who
trusted in him as a help out of evils_), 910; him to anwaldan are gelyfde
(_relied for himself on the help of God_), 1273.

a-lysan, w. v., _to loose, liberate_: pret. part. þa waes of þaem hroran helm
and byrne lungre a-lysed (_helm and corselet were straightway loosed from
him_), 1631.


M

maethelian, w. v. (sermocinari), _to speak, talk_: pret. sg. maethelode, 286,
348, 360, 371, 405, 456, 499, etc.; maethelade, 2426.

maga, w. m., _son, male descendant, young man_: nom. sg. maga Healfdenes
(Hroethgar), 189, 1475, 2144; maga Ecgþeowes (Beowulf), 2588: maga (Grendel),
979; se maga geonga (Wiglaf), 2676; Grendeles maga (_a relative of
Grendel_), 2007; acc. sg. þone magan, 944.

magan, v. with pret.-pres. form, _to be able_: pres. sg. I. III. maeg, 277,
478, 931, 943, 1485, 1734, etc.; II. meaht þu, 2048; subj. pres. maege,
2531, 2750; þeah ic eal maege (_even though I could_), 681; subj. pl. we
maegen, 2655; pret. sg. meahte, 542, 755, 1131, 1660, 2465, etc.; mihte,
190, 207, 462, 511, 571, 657, 1509, 2092, 2610; mehte, 1083, 1497, 1516,
1878; pl. meahton, 649, 942, 1455, 1912, 2374, 3080; mihton, 308, 313,
2684, 3164; subj. pret. sg. meahte, 243, 763, 2521; pres. sg. maeg,
sometimes = licet, _may, can, will_ (fut.), 1366, 1701, 1838, 2865.

mago (Goth. magu-s), st. m., _male, son_: nom. sg. mago Ecglafes (Hunfereth),
1466; mago Healfdenes (Hroethgar), 1868, 2012.

mago-dryht, st. f., _troop of young men, band of men_: nom. sg. mago-driht,
67.

mago-rinc, st. m., _hero, man_ (preeminently): gen. pl. mago-rinca, heap,
731.

magu-þegn, mago-þegn, st. m., _vassal, war-thane_: nom. sg. 408, 2758; dat.
sg. magu-þegne, 2080; acc. pl. magu-þegnas, 293; dat. pl. mago-þegnum,
1481; gen. pl. mago-þegna ... þone selestan (_the best of vassals_), 1406.

man, mon, st. m.: 1) _man, human being_: nom. sg. man, 25, 503, 534, 1049,
1354, 1399, 1535, 1877, etc.; mon, 209, 510, 1561, 1646, 2282, etc.; acc.
sg. w. mannan, 297, 577, 1944, 2128, 2775; wid-cuethne man, 1490; dat. sg.
men, 656, 753, 1880; menn, 2190; gen. sg. mannes, 1195 (?), 2081, 2534,
2542; monnes, 1730; nom. pl. men, 50, 162, 233, 1635, 3167; acc. pl. men,
69, 337, 1583, 1718; dat. pl. mannum, 3183; gen. pl. manna, 155, 201, 380,
702, 713, 736, etc.; monna, 1414, 2888.--2) indef. pron. = _one, they,
people_ (Germ. _man_): man, 1173, 1176; mon, 2356, 3177.--Comp.: fyrn-,
gleo-, gum-, iu-, lid-, sae-, waepned-man.

man. See munan.

man-cyn, st. n., _mankind_: dat. sg. man-cynne, 110; gen. sg. man-cynnes,
164, 2182; mon-cynnes, 196, 1956.

man-dream, st. m., _human joy, mundi voluptas_: acc. sg. man-dream, 1265;
dat. pl. mon-dreamum, 1716.

man-dryhten, st. m. (_lord of men_), _ruler of the people, prince, king_:
nom. sg. man-dryhten, 1979, 2648; mon-drihten, 436; mon-dryhten, 2866; acc.
sg. mon-dryhten, 2605; dat. sg. man-drihtne, 1230; man-dryhtne, 1250, 2282;
gen. sg. man-dryhtnes, 2850; mon-dryhtnes, 3150.

ge-mang, st. m., _troop, company_: dat. sg. on gemonge (_in the troop_ [of
the fourteen Geatas that returned from the sea]), 1644.

manian, w. v., _to warn, admonish_: pres. sg. III. manaeth swa and myndgaeth
... sarum wordum (_so warneth and remindeth he with bitter words_), 2058.

manig, monig, adj., _many, many a, much_: 1) adjectively: nom. sg. rinc
manig, 399; geong manig (_many a young man_), 855; monig snellic sae-rinc,
690; medu-benc monig, 777; so 839, 909, 919, 1511, 2763, 3023, etc.; acc.
sg. medo-ful manig, 1016; dat. sg. m. þegne monegum, 1342, 1420; dat. sg.
f. manigre maegethe, 75; acc. pl. manige men, 337; dat. pl. manegum maethmum,
2104; monegum maegethum, 5; gen. pl. manigra meda, 1179.--2) substantively:
nom. sg. manig, 1861; monig, 858; dat. sg. manegum, 349, 1888; nom. pl.
manige, 1024; monige, 2983; acc. pl. monige, 1599; gen. pl. manigra,
2092.--3) with depend. gen. pl.: dat. manegum maegetha, 1772; monegum fira,
2002; haeleetha monegum bold-agendra, 3112; acc. pl. rinca manige, 729;
(maethm)-aehta monige, 1614.

manig-oft, adv., _very often, frequently_, 171 [if manig and oft are to be
connected].

man-lice, adv., _man-like, manly_, 1047.

man-þwaere, adj., _kind, gentle toward men, philanthropic_: nom. sg. superl.
mon-þwaerust, 3183.

ma, contracted compar., _more_: with partitive gen., 504, 736, 1056.

maethum, maethethum, st. m., _gift, jewel, object of value_: acc. sg. maethethum,
169, 1053, 2056, 3017; dat. instr. sg. maethme, 1529, 1903; nom. pl. maethmas,
1861; acc. pl. madmas, 385, 472, 1028, 1483, 1757, 1868, etc.; dat. instr.
pl. maethmum, madmum, 1049, 1899, 2104, 2789; gen. pl. maethma, 1785, 2144,
2167, etc.; madma, 36, 41.--Comp.: dryht-, gold-, hord-, ofer-, sinc-,
wundor-maethum.

maethm-aeht, st. f., _treasure in jewels, costly objects_: gen. pl. maethm-aehta,
1614, 2834.

maethethum-faet, st. n., _treasure-casket_ or _cup, costly vessel_: nom. sg.,
2406.

maethm-gestreon, st. n., _precious jewel_: gen. pl. maethm-gestreona, 1932.

maethum-gifu, st. f., _gift of valuable objects, largess of treasure_: dat.
sg. aefter maethethum-gife, 1302.

maethum-sigl, st. n., _costly, sun-shaped ornament, valuable decoration_:
gen. pl. maethethum-sigla, 2758.

maethum-sweord, st. n., _costly sword_ (inlaid with gold and jewels): acc.
sg., 1024.

maethum-wela, w. m., _wealth of jewels, valuables_:: dat. sg.
aefter-maethethum-welan (_after the sight of the wealth of jewels_), 2751.

magas. See maeg.

mage, w. f., _female relative_: gen. sg. Grendles magan (_mother_), 1392.

man, st. n., _crime, misdeed_: instr. sg. mane, 110, 979; adv.,
_criminally_, 1056.

man-for-daedla, w. m., _evil-doer, criminal_: nom. pl. man-for-daedlan, 563.

man-scaetha, w. m., _mischievous, hurtful foe, hostis nefastus_: nom. sg.
713, 738, 1340; man-sceaetha, 2515.

mara (comp. of micel), adj., _greater, stronger, mightier_: nom. sg. m.
mara, 1354, 2556; neut. mare, 1561; acc. sg. m. maran, 2017; mund-gripe
maran (_a mightier hand-grip_), 754; with following gen. pl. maran ...
eorla (_a more powerful earl_), 247; fem. maran, 533, 1012; neut. mare,
518; with gen. pl. moreth-beala mare _(more, greater, deeds of murder_), 136;
gen. sg. f. maran, 1824.

maest (superl. of micel, mara), _greatest, strongest_: nom. sg. neut. (with
partitive gen.), maest, 78, 193; fem. maest, 2329; acc. sg. fem. faehethe maeste,
459; maeste ... worolde wynne (_the highest earthly pleasure_), 1080; neut.
n. (with partitive gen.) maest maeretha, 2646; hond-wundra maest, 2769; bael-fyra
maest, 3144; instr. sg. m. maeste craefte, 2182.

maecg. See mecg.

maegeth, st. f., _wife, maid, woman_: nom. sg., 3017; gen. pl. maegetha hose
(_accompanied by her maids of honor_), 925; maegetha, 944, 1284.

maegen, st. n.: 1) _might, bodily strength, heroic power_: acc. sg. maegen,
518, 1707; instr. sg. maegene, 780(?), 2668; gen. sg. maegenes, 418, 1271,
1535, 1717, etc.; maegnes, 671, 1762; maegenes strang, strengest (_great in
strength_), 1845, 196; maegenes rof (id.), 2085.--2) _prime, flower_ (of a
nation), _forces available in war_: acc. sg. swa he oft (i.e. etan) dyde
maegen Hreethmanna (_the best of the Hreethmen_), 445; gen. sg. wieth manna hwone
maegenes Deniga (_from(?) any of the men of the Danes_), 155.--Comp.
ofer-maegen.

maegen-agend, pres. part., _having great strength, valiant_: gen. pl.
-agendra, 2838.

maegen-byrethen, st. f., _huge burthen_: acc. sg. maegen-byrethenne, 3092; dat.
(instr.) sg., 1626.

maegen-craeft, st. m., _great, hero-like, strength_: acc. sg., 380.

maegen-ellen, st. n. (the same), acc. sg., 660.

maegen-fultum, st. m., _material aid_: gen. pl. naes þaet þonne maetost
maegen-fultuma (_that was not the least of strong helps_, i.e. the sword
Hrunting), 1456.

maegen-raes, st. m., _mighty attack, onslaught_: acc. sg., 1520.

maegen-strengo, st. f., _main strength, heroic power_: acc. sg., 2679.

maegen-wudu, st. m., _might-wood_, i.e. the spear, lance: acc. sg., 236.

maest, st. m., _mast_: nom. sg., 1899; dat. sg. be maeste (_beside the
mast_), 36; _to the mast_, 1906.

maeethum. See maethum, hyge-maeethum.

maeg, st. m., _kinsman by blood_: nom. sg. maeg, 408, 738, 759, 814, 915,
1531, 1945, etc; (_brother_), 468, 2605? acc. sg. maeg (_son_), 1340;
(_brother_), 2440, 2485, 2983; dat. sg. maege, 1979; gen. sg. maeges, 2629,
2676, 2699, 2880; nom. pl. magas, 1016; acc. pl. magas, 2816; dat. pl.
magum, 1179, 2615, 3066; (_to brothers_), 1168; maegum, 2354; gen. pl. maga,
247, 1080, 1854, 2007, 2743.--Comp.: faederen-, heafod-, wine-maeg.

maeg-burh, st. f., _borough of blood-kinsmen, entire population united by
ties of blood_; (in wider sense) _race, people, nation_: gen. sg.
lond-rihtes ... þaere maeg-burge (_of land possessions among the people_,
i.e. of the Geatas), 2888.

maegeth, st. f., _race, people_: acc. sg. maegethe, 1012; dat. sg. maegethe, 75;
dat. pl. maegethum, 5; gen. pl. maegetha, 25, 1772.

maeg-wine, st. m., _blood kinsman, friend_, 2480 (nom. pl.).

mael, st. n.: l) _time, point of time_: nom. sg. 316; þa waes sael and mael
(_there was_ [appropriate] _chance and time_), 1009; acc. sg. mael, 2634;
instr. pl. aerran maelum, 908, 2238, 3036; gen. pl. maela, 1250; saela and
maela, 1612; maela gehwylce (_each time, without intermission_), 2058.--2)
_sword, weapon_: nom. sg. broden (brogden) mael (_the drawn sword_), 1617,
1668 (cf. Grimm, Andreas and Elene, p. 156).--3) _mole, spot,
mark_.--Comp.: graeg-, hring-, sceaethen-, wunden-mael.

mael-cearu, st. f., _long-continued sorrow, grief_: acc. sg. mael-ceare, 189.

mael-gesceaft, st. f., _fate, appointed time_: acc. pl. ie on earde bad
mael-gesceafta (_awaited the time allotted for me by fate_), 2738.

maenan, w. v., with acc. in the sense of (1) _to remember, mention,
proclaim_: inf. maenan, 1068; pret. part. þaer waes Beowulfes maeretho maened,
858.--2) _to mention sorrowfully, mourn_: inf. 3173; pret. sg. giohetho maende
(_mourned sorrowfully_), 2268; pret. pl. maendon, 1150, 3150.

ge-maenan (see man), w. v. with acc., _to injure maliciously, break_: subj.
pret. pl. ge-maenden, 1102.

ge-maene, adj., _common, in common_: nom. sg. gemaene, 2474; þaer unc hwile
waes hand gemaene (i.e. in battle), 2138; sceal urum þaet sweord and helm bam
gemaene (i.e. wesan), 2661; nom. pl. gemaene, 1861; dat. pl. þaet þam folcum
sceal ... sib gemaenum (attraction for gemaene, i.e. wesan), 1858; gen. pl.
unc sceal (i.e. wesan) fela maethma gemaenra (_we two shall share many
treasures together_), 1785.

maerethu, st. f.: 1) _glory, a heroes fame_: nom. sg. 858; acc. sg. maeretho,
660, 688; acc. pl. maeretha, 2997; instr. pl. maerethum (_gloriously_), 2515:
gen. pl. maeretha, 504, 1531.--2) _deed of glory, heroism_: acc. sg. maeretho,
2135; gen. pl. maeretha, 408, 2646.--Comp. ellen-maerethu.

maere, adj., _memorable; celebrated, noble; well known, notorious_: nom. sg.
m. maere, 103, 129, 1716, 1762; se maera, 763, 2012, 2588; also as vocative
m. se maera, 1475; nom. fem. maeru, 2017; maere, 1953; neut. maere, 2406; acc.
sg. m. maerne, 36, 201, 353, 1599, 2385, 2722, 2789, 3099; neut. maere, 1024;
dat. sg. maerum, 345, 1302, 1993, 2080, 2573; to þaem maeran, 270; gen. sg.
maeres, 798; maeran, 1730; nom. pl. maere, 3071; superl. maerost, 899,--Comp.:
fore-, heaetho-maere.

maest. See mara.

maete, adj., _moderate, small_: superl. nom. sg. maetost, 1456.

mecg, maecg, st. m., _son, youth, man_. in comp. hilde-, oret-mecg,
wraec-maecg.

medla. See on-medla.

medu, st. m., _mead_: acc. sg. medu, 2634; dat. sg. to medo, 605.

medo-aern, st. n., _mead-hall_: acc. sg. medo-aern (Heorot), 69.

medu-benc, st. f., _mead-bench, bench in the mead-hall_: nom. sg.
medu-benc, 777; dat. sg. medu-bence, 1053; medo-bence, 1068, 2186;
meodu-bence, 1903.

medu-dream, st. m., _mead-joy, joyous carousing during mead-drinking_: acc.
sg. 2017.

medo-ful, st. n., _mead-cup_: acc. sg. 625, 1016.

medo-heal, st. f., _mead-hall_: nom. sg., 484; dat. sg. meodu-healle, 639.

medu-scenc, st. m., _mead-can, vessel_: instr. pl. meodu-scencum, 1981.

medu-seld, st. n., _mead-seat, mead-house_: acc. sg., 3066.

medo-setl, st. n., _mead-seat upon which one sits mead-drinking_: gen. pl.
meodo-setla, 5.

medo-stig, st. f., _mead-road, road to the mead-hall_: acc. sg. medo-stig,
925.

medo-wang, st. m., _mead-field_ (where the mead-hall stood): acc. pl.
medo-wongas, 1644.

meethel, st. n., _assembly, council_: dat. sg. on meethle, 1877.

meethel-stede, st. m., (properly _place of speech, judgment-seat_), here
_meeting-place, battle-field_ (so, also 425, the battle is conceived under
the figure of a parliament or convention): dat. sg. on þaem meethel-stede,
1083.

meethel-word, st. n., _words called forth at a discussion; address_: instr.
pl. meethel-wordum, 236.

melda, w. m., _finder, informer, betrayer_: gen. sg. þaes meldan, 2406.

meltan, st. v. intrans., _to consume by fire, melt or waste away_: inf.,
3012; pret. sg. mealt, 2327; pl. multon, 1121.

ge-meltan, the same: pret. sg. gemealt, 898, 1609, 1616; ne gemealt him se
mod-sefa (_his courage did not desert him_), 2629.

men. See man.

mene, st. m., _neck ornament, necklace, collar_: acc. sg., 1200.

mengan, w. v., _to mingle, unite, with_, w. acc. of thing: inf. se þe
mere-grundas mengan scolde, 1450.

ge-mengan, _to mix with, commingle_: pret. part. 849, 1594.

menigu, st. f., _multitude, many_: nom. and acc. sg. maethma menigeo
(_multitude of treasures, presents_), 2144; so, maenigo, 41.

mercels, st. m., _mark, aim_: gen. sg. mercelses, 2440.

mere, st. m., _sea, ocean_: nom. sg. se mere, 1363; acc. sg. on mere, 1131,
1604; on nicera mere, 846; dat. sg. fram mere, 856.

mere-deor, st. n., _sea-beast_: acc. sg., 558.

mere-fara, w. m., _seafarer_: gen. sg. mere-faran, 502.

mere-fix, st. m., _sea-fish_: gen. pl. mere-fixa (_the whale_, cf. 540),
549.

mere-grund, st. m., _sea-bottom_: acc. sg., 2101; acc. pl. mere-grundas,
1450.

mere-hraegl, st. n., _-sea-garment_, i.e., sail: gen. pl. mere-hraegla sum,
1906.

mere-liethend, pres. part., _moving on the sea, sailor_: nom. pl.
mere-liethende, 255.

mere-straet, st. f., _sea-street, way over the sea_: acc. pl. mere-straeta
514.

mere-strengo, st. f., _sea-power, strength in the sea_: acc. sg., 533.

mere-wif, st. n., _sea-woman, mer-woman_: acc. sg. (of Grendel's mother),
1520.

mergen. See morgen.

met, st. n., _thought, intention_ (cf. metian = meditari): acc. pl. onsael
meoto, 489 (meaning doubtful; see Bugge, Journal 8, 292; Dietrich, Haupt's
Zeits. 11, 411; Koerner, Eng. Stud. 2, 251).

ge-met, st. n., _an apportioned share; might, power, ability _: nom. sg.
nis þaet ... gemet mannes nefne min anes (_nobody, myself excepted, can do
that_), 2534; acc. sg. ofer min gemet (_beyond my power_), 2880; dat. sg.
mid gemete, 780.

ge-met, adj., _well-measured, meet, good_: nom. sg. swa him gemet þince
(þuhte), (_as seemed meet to him_), 688, 3058. See un-gemete, adv.

metan, st. v., _to measure, pass over_ or _along_: pret. pl. fealwe straete
mearum maeton (_measured the yellow road with their horses_), 918; so, 514,
1634.

ge-metan, the same: pret. sg. medu-stig gemaet.(_measured, walked over, the
road to the mead-hall_), 925.

metod, st. m. (the measuring, arranging) _Creator, God_: nom. sg., 110,
707, 968, 1058, 2528; scir metod, 980; soeth metod, 1612; acc. sg. metod,
180; dat. sg. metode, 169, 1779; gen. sg. metodes, 671.--Comp. eald-metod.

metod-sceaft, st. f.: 1) _the Creator's determination, divine purpose,
fate_: acc. sg. -sceaft, 1078.--2) _the Creators glory_: acc. sg.
metod-sceaft seon (i.e. die), 1181; dat. sg. to metod-sceafte, 2816.

mece, st. m., _sword_: nom. sg., 1939; acc. sg. mece, 2048; bradne mece,
2979; gen. sg. meces, 1766, 1813, 2615, 2940; dat. pl. instr. mecum, 565;
gen. pl. meca, 2686.--Comp.: beado-, haeft-, hilde-mece.

med, st. f., _meed, reward_: acc. sg. mede, 2135; dat. sg. mede, 2147; gen.
pl. meda, 1179.

ge-mede, st. n., _approval, permission_ (Grein): acc. pl. ge-medu, 247.

meethe, adj., _tired, exhausted, dejected_: in comp. hyge-, sae-meethe.

metan, w. v., _to meet, find, fall in with_: with acc., pret. pl. syethethan
Aescheres ... hafelan metton, 1422; subj. pret. sg. þaet he ne mette ... on
elran man mundgripe maran (_that he never met, in any other man, with a
mightier hand-grip_), 752.

ge-metan, with acc., the same: pret. sg. gemette, 758, 2786; pl. naes þa
long to þon, þaet þa aglaecean hy eft gemetton (_it was not long after that
the warriors again met each other_), 2593.

ge-meting, st. f., _meeting, hostile coming together_: nom. sg., 2002.

meagol, adj., _mighty, immense; formal, solemn_: instr. pl. meaglum wordum,
1981.

mearc, st. f., _frontier, limit, end_: dat. sg. to mearce (_the end of
life_), 2385.--Comp. Weder-mearc, 298.

ge-mearc, st. n., _measure, distance_: comp. fot-, mil-ge-mearc.

mearcian, w. v., _to mark, stain_: pres. ind. sg. mearcaeth morhopu (_will
stain, mark, the moor with the blood of the corpse_), 450.

ge-mearcian, the same: pret. part. (Cain) morethre gemearcod (_murder-marked_
[cf. 1 Book Mos. IV. 15]), 1265; swa waes on þaem scennum ... gemearcod ...
hwam þaet sweord geworht waere (_engraved for whom the sword had been
wrought_), 1696.

mearc-stapa, w. m., _march-strider, frontier-haunter_ (applied to Grendel
and his mother): nom. sg., 103; acc. pl. mearc-stapan, 1349.

mearh, st. m., _horse, steed_: nom. pl. mearas, 2164; acc. pl. mearas, 866,
1036; dat. pl. inst. mearum, 856, 918; mearum and maethmum, 1049, 1899; gen.
pl. meara and maethma, 2167.

mearn. See murnan.

meodu. See medu.

meoto. See met.

meotud. See metod.

meowle, w. f., _maiden_: comp. geo-meowle.

micel, adj., _great, huge, long_ (of time): nom. sg. m., 129, 502; fem.,
67, 146, 170; neut., 772; acc. sg. m. micelne, 3099; fem, micle, 1779,
3092; neut. micel, 270, 1168. The comp. mare must be supplied before þone
in: medo-aern micel ... (mare) þone yldo beam aefre ge-frunon, 69; instr. sg.
ge-trume micle, 923; micle (_by much, much_); micle leofre (_far dearer_),
2652; efne swa micle (laessa), (_[less] even by so much_), 1284; oftor micle
(_much oftener_), 1580; dat. sg, weak form miclan, 2850; gen. sg. miclan,
979. The gen. sg. micles is an adv. = _much, very_: micles wyrethne gedon
(_deem worthy of much_, i.e. honor very highly), 2186; to fela micles (_far
too much, many_), 695; acc. pl. micle, 1349. Compar., see mara.

mid, I. prep. w. dat., instr., and acc., signifying preeminently _union,
community, with_, hence: 1) w. dat.: a) _with, in company, community,
with_; mid Finne, 1129; mid Hroethgare, 1593; mid scip-herge, 243; mid
gesiethum (_with his comrades_), 1314; so, 1318, 1964, 2950, etc.; mid his
freo-drihtne, 2628; mid þaem lacum (_with the gifts_), 1869; so, 2789, 125;
mid haele (_with good luck!_), 1218; mid baele for (_sped off amid fire_),
2309. The prep. postponed: him mid (_with him, in his company_), 41; _with
him_, 1626; ne waes him Fitela mid (_was not with him_), 890. b) _with,
among_: mid Geatum (_among the Geatas_), 195, 2193, 2624; mid Scyldingum,
274; mid Eotenum, 903; mid yldum (eldum), 77, 2612; mid him (_with, among,
one another_), 2949. In temporal sense: mid aer-daege (_at dawn_), 126.--2)
_with, with the help of, through_, w. dat.: mid ar-stafum (_through his
grace_), 317; so, 2379; mid grape (_with the fist_), 438; so, 1462, 2721;
mid his hete-þoncum (_through his hatred_), 475; mid sweorde, 574; so,
1660, 2877; mid gemete (_through, by, his power_), 780; so, 1220, 2536,
2918; mid gode (_with benefits_), 1185; mid hearme (_with harm, insult_),
1893; mid þaere sorge (_with [through?] this sorrow_), 2469; mid rihte (_by
rights_), 2057. With instr.: mid þy wife (_through [marriage with] the
woman_), 2029.--3) w. acc., _with, in community, company, with_: mid his
eorla gedriht, 357; so, 634, 663, 1673; mid hine, 880; mid minne
gold-gyfan, 2653.

II. adv., mid, _thereamong, in the company_, 1643; _at the same time,
likewise_, 1650.

middan-geard, st. m., _globe, earth_: acc. sg., 75, 1772; dat. sg. on
middan-gearde, 2997; gen. sg. middan-geardes, 504, 752.

midde, w. f., _middle = medius_: dat. sg. on middan (_through the middle,
in two_), 2706; gen. sg. (adv.) to-middes (_in the midst_), 3142.

middel-niht, st. f., _midnight_: dat. pl. middel-nihtum, 2783, 2834.

miht, st. f., _might, power, authority_: acc. sg. þurh drihtnes miht
(_through the Lord's help, power_), 941; instr. pl. selfes mihtum, 701.

mihtig, adj.: 1) _physically strong, powerful_: acc. sg. mihtig mere-deor,
558; mere-wif mihtig, 1520.--2) _possessing authority, mighty_: nom. sg.
mihtig god, 702, 1717, 1726; dat. sg. mihtigan drihtne, 1399.--Comp.: ael-,
fore-mihtig.

milde, adj., _kind, gracious, generous_: nom. sg. modes milde
(_kind-hearted_), 1230; instr. pl. mildum wordum (_graciously_), 1173.
Superl. nom. sg. worold-cyning mannum mildust (_a king most liberal to
men_), 3183.

milts, st. f., _kindness, benevolence_: nom. sg., 2922.

missan, w. v. with gen., _to miss, err in_: pret. sg. miste mercelses
(_missed the mark_), 2440.

missere, st. n., _space of a semester, half a year_: gen. pl. hund missera
(_fifty winters_), 2734, 2210; generally, _a long period of time, season_,
1499, 1770; fela missera, 153, 2621.

mist-hlieth, st. n., _misty cliff, cloud-capped slope_: dat. pl. under
mist-hleoethum, 711.

mistig, adj., _misty_: acc. pl. mistige moras, 162.

mil-gemearc, st. n., _measure by miles_: gen. sg. mil-gemearces, 1363.

min: 1) poss. pron., _my, mine_, 255, 345, etc.; Hygelac min (_my lord_, or
_king, H._), 2435.--2) gen. sg. of pers. pron. ic, _of me_, 2085, 2534,
etc.

molde, w. f., _dust; earth, field_: in comp. graes-molde.

mon. See man.

ge-mong. See ge-mang.

moreth-bealu, st. n., _murder, deadly hale_ or _deed of murder_: gen. pl.
moreth-beala, 136.

morethor, st. n., _deed of violence, murder_: dat. instr. sg. morethre, 893,
1265, 2783; gen. sg. morethres, 2056; morethres scyldig (_guilty of murder_),
1684.

morethor-bed, st. n., _bed of death, murder-bed_: acc. sg. waes þam yldestan
... morethor-bed stred (_a bed of death was spread for the eldest_, i.e.
through murder his death-bed was prepared), 2437.

morethor-bealu, st. n., _death-bale, destruction by murder_: acc. sg.
morethor-bealo, 1080, 2743.

morethor-hete, st. m., _murderous hate_: gen. sg. þaes morethor-hetes, 1106.

morgen, morn, mergen, st. m., _morning, forenoon_; also _morrow_: nom. sg.
morgen, 1785, 2125; (_morrow_), 2104; acc. sg. on morgen (_in the
morning_), 838; dat. sg. on morgne, 2485; on mergenne, 565, 2940; gen. pl.
morna gehwylce (_every morning_), 2451.

morgen-ceald, adj., _morning-cold, dawn-cold_: nom. sg. gar morgen-ceald
(_spear chilled by the early air of morn_), 3023.

morgen-lang, adj., _lasting through the morning_: acc. sg. morgen-longne
daeg (_the whole forenoon_), 2895.

morgen-leoht, st. n., _morning-light_: nom. sg., 605, 918.

morgen-sweg, st. m., _morning-cry, cry at morn_: nom. sg., 129.

morgen-tid, st. f., _morning-tide_: acc. sg. on morgen-tide, 484, 818(?)

morn. See morgen.

mod, st. n.: 1) _heart, soul, spirit, mood, mind, manner of thinking_: nom.
sg., 50, 731; waefre mod (_the flicker ing spirit, the fading breath_),
1151; acc. sg. on mod (_into his mind_), 67; dat. instr. sg. mode geþungen
(_of mature, lofty spirit_), 625; on mode (_in heart, mind_), 754, 1845,
2282? 2528; on hreoum mode (_fierce of spirit_), 2582; gen. sg. modes, 171,
811, 1707; modes bliethe (_gracious-minded, kindly disposed_), 436; so, modes
milde, 1230; modes seoce (_depressed in mind_), 1604.--2) _boldness,
courage_: nom. and acc. sg., 1058, 1168. 3) _passion, fierceness_: nom.
sg., 549.--Comp. form adj.: galg-, geomor-, glaed-, gueth-, hreoh-, irre-,
sarig-, stieth-, swieth-, werig-mod.

mod-cearu, st. f., _grief of heart_: acc. sg. mod-ceare, 1993, 3150.

mod-gehygd, st. f ., _thought of the heart; mind_: instr. pl. mod-gehygdum,
233

mod-ge-þanc, st. n., _mood-thought, meditation_: acc. sg. mod-ge-þonc,
1730.

mod-giomor, adj., _grieved at heart, dejected_: nom. sg., 2895.

modig, adj., _courageous_: nom. sg., 605, 1644, 1813, 2758; he þaes (þaem,
MS.) modig waes (_had the courage for it_), 1509; se modega, 814; dat. sg.
mid þam modigan, 3012; gen. sg. modges, 502; modiges, 2699; Geata leod
georne truwode modgan maegnes (_trusted firmly in his bold strength_), 671;
nom. pl. modge, 856; modige, 1877; gen. pl. modigra, 312, 1889.--Comp,
fela-modig.

modig-lic, adj., _of bold appearance_: compar. acc. pl. modiglicran, 337.

mod-lufe, w. f., _hearts affection, love_: gen. sg. þinre mod-lufan, 1824.

mod-sefa, w. m., _thought of the heart; brave, bold temper; courage_: nom.
sg., 349, 1854, 2629; acc. sg. mod-sefan, 2013; dat. sg. mod-sefan, 180.

mod-þracu, st. f., _boldness, courage, strength of mind_: dat. sg. for his
mod-þraece, 385.

modor, f., _mother_: nom. sg., 1259, 1277, 1283, 1684, 2119; acc. sg.
modor, 1539, 2140, 2933.

mona, w. m., _moon_: gen. sg. monan, 94.

mor, st. m., _moor, morass, swamp_: acc. sg. ofer myrcan mor, 1406; dat.
sg. of more, 711; acc. pl. moras, 103, 162, 1349.

mor-hop, st. n., _place of refuge in the moor, hiding-place in the swamp_:
acc. pl. mor-hopu, 450.

ge-mot, st. n., _meeting_: in comp. hand-, torn-ge-mot.

motan, pret.-pres. v.: 1) _power_ or _permission to have something, to be
permitted; may, can_: pres. sg. I., III. mot, 186, 442, 604; II. most,
1672; pl. moton, 347, 365, 395; pres. subj. ic mote, 431; III. se þe mote,
1388; pret sg. moste, 168, 707, 736, 895, 1488, 1999, 2242, 2505, etc.; pl.
moston, 1629, 1876, 2039, 2125, 2248; pres. subj. sg. II. þaet þu hine
selfne geseon moste (_mightest see_), 962.--2) _shall, must, be obliged_:
pres. sg. mot, 2887; pret. sg. moste, 1940; þaer he þy fyrste forman dogore
wealdan moste, swa him Wyrd ne gescraf, hreeth aet hilde (_if he must for the
first time that day be victorious, as Fate had denied him victory_, cf.
2681, 2683 seqq.), 2575.

ge-munan, pret.-pres. v., _to have in mind, be mindful; remember, think
of_, w. acc.: pres. sg. hine gearwe geman witena wel-hwylc (_each of the
knowing ones still remembers him well_), 265; ic þe þaes lean geman (_I
shall not forget thy reward for this_), 1221; ic þaet eall gemon (_I
remember all that_), 2428; so, 1702, 2043; gif he þaet eall gemon hwaet ...
(_if he is mindful of all that which_ ...), 1186; ic þaet mael gemon hwaer...
(_I remember the time when_...), 2634; pret. sg. w. gemunde... aefen-spraece
(_recalled his evening speech_), 759; so, 871, 1130, 1260, 1271, 1291,
2115, 2432, 2607, 2679; se þaes leod-hryres lean ge-munde (_was mindful of
reward for the fall of the ruler_), 2392; þaet he Eotena bearn inne gemunde
(_that he in this should remember, take vengeance on, the children of the
Eotens_), 1142; so, hond gemunde faehetho genoge (_his hand remembered strife
enough_), 2490; ne ge-munde mago Ecglafes þaet ... (_remembered not that
which_ ...), 1466; pret. pl. helle gemundon in mod-sefan (_their thoughts_
[as heathens] _fixed themselves on, remembered, hell_), 179.

on-munan, w. acc. pers. and gen. of thing, _to admonish, exhort_: pret. sg.
onmunde usic maeretha (_exhorted us to deeds of glory_), 2641.

mund, st. f., _hand_: instr. pl. mundum, mid mundum, 236, 514, 1462, 3023,
3092.

mund-bora, w. m., _protector, guardian, preserver_: nom. sg., 1481, 2780.

mund-gripe, st. m., _hand-grip, seizure_: acc. sg. mund-gripe, 754; dat.
sg. mund-gripe, 380, 1535; aefter mund-gripe (_after having seized the
criminal_), 1939.

murnan, st. v., _to shrink from, be afraid of, avoid_: pret. sg. no mearn
fore faehethe and fyrene, 136; so, 1538; nalles for ealdre mearn (_was not
apprehensive for his life_), 1443.--2) _to mourn, grieve_: pres. part. him
waes ... murnende mod, 50; pres. subj., þonne he fela murne (_than that he
should mourn much_), 1386.

be-murnan, be-meornan, with acc., _to mourn over_: pret. be-mearn, 908,
1078.

murn-lice. See un-murn-lice.

mueth-bana, w. m., _mouth-destroyer_: dat. sg. to mueth-bonan (of Grendel
because he bit his victim to death), 2080.

muetha, w. m., _mouth, entrance_: acc. sg. recedes muethan (_mouth of the
house, door_), 725.

ge-mynd, st. f., _memory, memorial, remembrance_: dat. pl. to gemyndum,
2805, 3017. See weoreth-mynd.

myhdgian, w. v., _to call to mind, remember_: pres. sg. myndgaeth, 2058;
pres. part. w. gen. gif þonne Fresna hwylc ... þaes morethor-hetes myndgiend
waere (_were to call to mind the bloody feud_), 1106.

ge-myndgian, w. v. w. acc., _to remember_: bieth gemyndgad ... eaforan
ellor-sieth (_is reminded of his son's decease_), 2451.

ge-myndig, adj., _mindful_: nom. sg. w. gen., 614, 869, 1174, 1531, 2083,
etc.

myne, st. m.: 1) _mind, wish_: nom. sg., 2573.--2) _love_(?): ne his myne
wisse (_whose_ [God's] _love he knew not_), 169.

ge-mynian, w. v. w. acc., _to be mindful of_: imper. sg. gemyne maeretho! 660.

myntan, w. v., _to intend, think of, resolve_: pret. sg. mynte ... manna
cynnes sumne besyrwan (_meant to entrap all_(?) [see sum], _some one of
(?), the men_), 713; mynte þaet he gedaelde ... (_thought to sever_), 732;
mynte se maera, þaer he meahte swa, widre gewindan (_intended to flee_), 763.

myrce, adj., _murky, dark_: acc. sg. ofer myrcan mor, 1406.

myreth, st. f., _joy, mirth_: dat. (instr.) sg. modes myrethe, 8n.


N

naca, w. m., _vessel, ship_: acc. sg. nacan, 295; gen. sg. nacan,
214.--Comp.: hring-, yeth-naca.

nacod, adj., _naked_: nom. and acc. sg. swurd, gueth-bill nacod, 539, 2586;
nacod nieth-draca, 2274.

nalas, nales, nallas. See nealles.

nama, w. m., _name_: nom. sg. Beowulf is min nama, 343; waes þaem haeft-mece
Hrunting nama, 1458; acc. sg. scop him Heort naman (_gave it the name
Hart_), 78.

na (from ne-a), strength, negative, _never, not all_, 445, 567, 1537.

nah, from ne-ah. See agan.

nan (from ne-an), indef. pron., _none, no_: with gen. pl. gueth-billa nan,
804; adjectively, nan ... iren aergod, 990.

nat, from ne-wat: _I know not=nescio_. See witan.

nat-hwylc (nescio quis, ne-wat-hwylc, _know not who, which_, etc.), indef.
pron., _any, a certain one, some or other_: 1) w. partitive gen.: nom. sg.
gumena nat-hwylc, 2234;. gen. sg. nat-hwylces (þara banena), 2054; nietha
nat-hwylces(?), 2216; nat-hwylces haeleetha bearna, 2225.--2) adjectively:
dat. sg. in nieth-sele nat-hwylcum, 1514.

naebben, from ne-haebben (subj. pres.). See habban.

naefne. See nefne.

naegel, st. m., _nail_: gen. pl. naegla (of the finger-nails), 986.

naegled, part., _nailed?, nail-like?, buckled?_: acc. sg. neut. naegled (MS.
gled) sinc, 2024.

naes, st. m., _naze, rock projecting into the sea, cliff, promontory_: acc.
sg. naes, 1440, 1601, 2899; dat. sg. naesse, 2244, 2418; acc. pl. windige
naessas, 1412; gen. pl. naessa, 1361.

naes, from ne-waes (_was not_). See wesan.

naes, neg. adv., _not, not at all_, 562, 2263.

naes-hlieth, st. n., _declivity, slope of a promontory that sinks downward to
the sea_: dat. pl. on naes-hleoethum, 1428.

naefre, adv., _never_, 247, 583, 592, 656, 719, 1042, 1049, etc.; also
strengthened by ne: naefre ne, 1461.

ge-naegan, w. v. w. acc. pers. and gen. of thing, _to attack, press_; pret.
pl. nietha genaegdan nefan Hererices (_in combats pressed hard upon H.'s
nephew_), 2207; pret. part. weareth ... nietha genaeged, 1440.

naenig (from ne-aenig), pron., _not any, none, no_: 1) substantively w. gen.
pl.: nom. sg., 157, 242, 692; dat. sg. naenegum, 599; gen. pl. naenigra,
950.--2) adjectively: nom. sg. oether naenig, 860; naenig waeter, 1515; naenig
... deor, 1934; acc. sg. naenigne ... hord-maethethum, 1199.

naere, from ne-waere (_were not, would not be_). See wesan.

ne, simple neg., _not_, 38, 50, 80, 83, 109, etc.; before imper. ne sorga!
1385; ne gym! 1761, etc. Doubled =_certainly not, not even that_: ne ge ...
gearwe ne wisson (_ye certainly have not known_, etc.), 245; so, 863; ne ic
... wihte ne wene (_nor do I at all in the least expect_), 2923; so, 182.
Strengthened by other neg.: noether ... ne, 2125; swa he ne mihte no ... (_so
that he absolutely could not_), 1509.

ne ... ne, _not ... and not, nor; neither ... nor_, 154-157, 511,
1083-1085, etc. Another neg. may supply the place of the first ne: so, no
... ne, 575-577, 1026-1028, 1393-1395, etc.; naefre ... ne, 583-584; nalles
... ne, 3016-3017. The neg. may be omitted the first time: aer ne siethethan
(_neither before nor after, before nor since_), 719; sueth ne noreth (_south
nor north_), 859; adl ne yldo (_neither illness nor old age_), 1737; wordum
ne worcum (_neither by word nor deed_), 1101; wiston and ne wendon (_knew
not and weened not_), 1605.

nefa, w. m., _nephew, grandson_: nom. sg. nefa (_grandson_), 1204; so,
1963; (_nephew_), 2171; acc. sg. nefan (_nephew_), 2207; dat. sg. nefan
(_nephew_), 882.

nefne, naefne, nemne (orig. from ne-gif-ne): 1) subj.: a) with depend.
clause = _unless_: nefne him witig god wyrd forstode (_if fate, the wise
God, had not prevented him_), 1057; nefne god sylfa ... sealde (_unless God
himself_, etc.), 3055; naefne him his wlite leoge (MS. naefre) (_unless his
face belie him_), 250; naefne he waes mara (_except that he was huger_),
1354; nemne him heaetho-byrne helpe ge-fremede, 1553; so, 2655.--b) w.
follow. substantive = _except, save, only_: nefne sin-frea (_except the
husband_), 1935; ic lyt hafo heafod-maga nefne Hygelac þec (_have no near
kin but thee_), 2152; nis þaet eower (gen. pl.) sieth ... nefne min anes,
2534.--2) Prep. with dat., _except_: nemne feaum anum, 1082.

ge-nehost. See ge-neahhe.

nelle, from ne-wille (_I will not_). See willan.

nemnan, w. v. w. acc.: 1) _to name, call_: pres. pl. þone yldestan
oret-mecgas Beowulf nemnaeth (_the warriors call the most distinguished one
Beowulf_), 364; so inf. nemnan, 2024; pret. pl. nemdon, 1355.--2) _to
address_, as in

be-nemnan, _to pronounce solemnly, put under a spell_: pret. sg. Fin
Hengeste ... aethum be-nemde þaet (_asserted, promised under oath that_ ...),
1098; pret. pl. swa hit oeth domes daeg diope benemdon þeodnas maere (_put
under a curse_), 3070.

nemne. See nefne.

nerian, ge-nerian, w. v., _to save, rescue, liberate_: pres. sg. Wyrd oft
nereeth unfaegne eorl, 573; pret. part. haefde ... sele Hroethgares ge-nered wieth
niethe (_saved from hostility_), 828.

ge-nesan, st. v.: 1) intrans., _to remain over, be preserved_: pret. sg.
hrof ana genaes ealles ansund (_the roof alone was quite sound_), 1000.--2)
w. acc., _to endure successfully, survive, escape from_: pret. sg. se þa
saecce ge-naes, 1978; fela ic ... gueth-raesa ge-naes, 2427; pret. part. swa he
nietha gehwane genesen haefde, 2398.

net, st. n., _net_: in comp. breost-, here-, hring-, inwit-, searo-net.

nedla, w. m., _dire necessity, distress_: in comp. þrea-nedla.

neethan (G. nanþjan), w. v., _to venture, undertake boldly_: pres. part.
nearo neethende (_encountering peril_), 2351; pret. pl. þaer git ... on deop
water aldrum neethdon (_where ye two risked your lives in the deep water_),
510; so, 538.

ge-neethan, the same: inf. ne dorste under yetha gewin aldre ge-neethan, 1470.
With depend. clause: naenig þaet dorste geneethan þaet (_none durst undertake
to_ ...), 1934; pret. sg. he under harne stan ana geneethde frecne daede (_he
risked alone the bold deed, venturing under the grey rock_), 889; (ic) wige
under waetere weorc geneethde earfoeth-lice (_I with difficulty stood the work
under the water in battle_, i.e. could hardly win the victory), 1657; ic
geneethde fela guetha (_ventured on, risked, many contests_), 2512; pres. pl.
(of majesty) we ... frecne geneethdon eafoeth uncuethes (_we have boldly risked,
dared, the monster's power_), 961.

neh. See neah.

ge-neahhe, adv., _enough, sufficiently_, 784, 3153; superl. genehost braegd
eorl Beowulfes ealde lafe (_many an earl of B.'s_), 795.

nealles (from ne-ealles), adv., _omnino non, not at all, by no means_:
nealles, 2146, 2168, 2180, 2223, 2597, etc.; nallas, 1720, 1750; nalles,
338, 1019, 1077, 1443, 2504, etc.; nalas, 43, 1494, 1530, 1538; nales,
1812.

nearo, st. n., _strait, danger, distress_: acc. sg. nearo, 2351, 2595.

nearo, adj., _narrow_: acc. pl. f. nearwe, 1410.

nearwe, adv., _narrowly_, 977.

nearo-craeft, st. m., _art of rendering difficult of access?,
inaccessibility_ (see 2214 seqq.): instr. pl. nearo-craeftum, 2244.

nearo-fah, m., _foe that causes distress, war-foe_: gen. sg. nearo-fages,
2318.

nearo-þearf, st. f., _dire need, distress_: acc. sg. nearo-þearfe, 422.

ge-nearwian, w. v., _to drive into a corner, press upon_: pret. part.
genearwod, 1439.

neah, neh: 1) adj., _near, nigh_: nom. sg. neah, 1744, 2729. In superl.
also = _last_: instr. sg. nyhstan siethe (_for the last time_), 1204;
niehstan siethe, 2512.

2) adv., _near_: feor and (oethethe) neah, 1222, 2871; 3) prep, sae-grunde neah,
564; so, 1925, 2243; holm-wylme neh, 2412. Compar. near, 746.

nean, adv., _near by, (from) close at hand_, 528; (neon, MS.), 3105;
feorran and nean, 840; nean and feorran, 1175, 2318.

ge-neat, st. m., _comrade, companion_: in comp. beod-, heoreth-geneat.

nioethor. See niether.

neowol, adj., _steep, precipitous_: acc. pl. neowle, 1412.

neod, st. f., _polite intercourse regulated by etiquette?, hall-joy?_: acc.
sg. niode, 2117; inst. (= _joy_), 2216.

neod-laethu, st. f., _polite invitation; wish_: dat. sg. aefter neod-laethu
(_according to his wishes_), 1321.

neosan, neosian, w. v. w. gen., _to seek out, look for; to attack_: inf.
neosan, 125, 1787, 1792, 1807, 2075; niosan, 2389, 2672; neosian, 115,
1126; niosian, 3046; pret. sg. niosade, 2487.

neotan, st. v., _to take, accept_, w. gen.; _to use, enjoy_: imper. sg.
neot, 1218.

be-neotan, w. dat., _to rob, deprive of_: inf. hine aldre be-neotan, 681;
pret. sg. cyning ealdre bi-neat (_deprived the king of life_), 2397.

nicor, st. m., _sea-horse, walrus, sea-monster_ (cf. Bugge in Zacher's
Journal, 4, 197): acc. pl. niceras, 422, 575; nicras, 1428; gen. pl.
nicera, 846.

nicor-hus, st. n., _house_ or _den of sea-monsters_: gen. pl. nicor-husa,
1412.

nieth st. m., _man, human being_: gen. pl. niethetha, 1006; nietha? (passage
corrupt), 2216.

niether, nyether, neoethor, adv., _down, downward_: niether, 1361; nioethor, 2700;
nyether, 3045.

nieth-sele, st. m., _hall, room, in the deep_ (Grein): dat. sg. [in] nieth-sele
nat-hwylcum, 1514.

nigen, num., _nine_: acc. nigene, 575.

niht, st. f. _night_: nom. sg., 115, 547. 650, 1321, 2117; acc. sg. niht,
135, 737, 2939; gystran niht (_yester-night_), 1335; dat. sg. on niht, 575,
684; on wanre niht, 703; gen. sg. nihtes hwilum (_sometimes at night, in
the hours of the night_), 3045; as adv. = _of a night, by night_, G.
nachts, 422, 2274; daeges and nihtes, 2270; acc. pl. seofon niht
(_se'nnight, seven days_, cf. Tac. Germ, 11), 517; dat. pl. sweartum
nihtum, 167; deorcum nihtum, 275, 221; gen. pl. nihta, 545, 1366.--Comp.:
middel-, sin-niht.

niht-bealu, st. n., _night-bale, destruction by night_: gen. pl.
niht-bealwa, 193.

niht-helm, st. m., _veil_ or _canopy of night_: nom. sg., 1790.

niht-long, adj., _lasting through the night_: acc. sg. m. niht-longne fyrst
(_space of a night_), 528.

niht-weorc, st. n., _night-work, deed done at night_: instr. sg.
niht-weorce, 828.

niman, st. v. w. acc.: 1) _to take, hold, seize, undertake_: pret. sg. nam
þa mid handa hige-þihtigne rinc, 747; pret. pl. we . . . niode naman,
2117.--2) _to take, take away, deprive of_: pres. sg. se þe hine deaeth nimeeth
(_he whom death carrieth off_), 441; so, 447; nymeeth, 1847; nymeeth nyd-bade,
599; subj. pres. gif mec hild nime, 452, 1482; pret. sg. ind. nam on
Ongenþio iren-byrnan, 2987; ne nom he ... maethm-aehta ma (_he took no more of
the rich treasures_), 1613; pret. part. þa waes ... seo cwen numen (_the
queen carried off_), 1154.

be-niman, _to deprive of_: pret. sg. oeth þaet hine yldo benam maegenes wynnum
(_till age bereft him of joy in his strength_), 1887.

for-niman, _to carry off_: pres. sg. þe þa deaeth for-nam (_whom death
carried off_), 488; so, 557, 696, 1081, 1124, 1206, 1437, etc. Also, dat.
for acc.: pret. pl. him irenna ecge fornamon, 2829.

ge-niman: 1) _to take, seize_: pret. sg. (hine) be healse ge-nam (_clasped
him around the neck, embraced him_), 1873.--2) _to take, take away_: pret.
on reste genam þritig þegna, 122; heo under heolfre genam cuethe folme, 1303;
segn eac genom, 2777; þa mec sinca baldor ... aet minum faeder genam (_took
me at my father's hands, adopted me_), 2430; pret. part. genumen, 3167.

ge-nip, st. n., _darkness, mist, cloud_: acc. pl. under naessa genipu, 1361;
ofer floda genipu, 2809.

nis, from ne-is (_is not_): see wesan.

niwe, niowe, adj., _new, novel; unheard-of_: nom. sg. sweg up a-stag niwe
geneahhe (_a monstrous hubbub arose_), 784; beorh ... niwe (_a
newly-raised(?) grave-mound_), 2244; acc. sg. niwe sibbe (_the new
kinship_), 950; instr. sg. niwan stefne (properly, nova voce; here = de
novo, iterum, _again_), 2595; niowan stefne (_again_), 1790; gen. pl. niwra
spella (_new tidings_), 2899.

ge-niwian, w. v., _to renew_: pret. part. ge-niwod, 1304, 1323; geniwad,
2288.

niw-tyrwed, pret. part., _newly-tarred_: acc. sg. niw-tyrwedne (-tyrwydne,
MS.) nacan, 295.

nieth, st. m., properly only _zeal, endeavor_; then _hostile endeavor,
hostility, battle, war_: nom. sg., 2318; acc. sg. nieth, 184, 276; Wedera nieth
(_enmity against the W., the sorrows of the Weders_), 423; dat. sg. wieth
(aet) niethe, 828, 2586; instr. niethe, 2681; gen. pl. nietha, 883, 2351, 2398,
etc.; also instr. = _by, in, battle_, 846, 1440, 1963, 2171, 2207.--Comp.:
bealo-, faer-, here-, hete-, inwit-, searo-, wael-nieth.

nieth-draca, w. m., _battle-dragon_: nom. sg., 2274.

nieth-gast, st. m., _hostile alien, fell demon_: acc. sg. þone nieth-gaest (_the
dragon_), 2700.

nieth-geweorc, st. n., _work of enmity, deed of evil_: gen. pl. -geweorca,
684.

nieth-grim, adj., _furious in battle, savage_: nom. sg., 193.

nieth-heard, adj., _valiant in war_: nom. sg., 2418.

nieth-hydig, adj., _eager for battle, valorous_: nom. pl. nieth-hydige men,
3167.

ge-niethla, w. m., _foe, persecutor, waylayer_: in comp. ferheth-,
feorh-geniethla.

nieth-wundor, st. n., _hostile wonder, strange marvel of evil_: acc. sg.,
1366.

nipan, st. v., _to veil, cover over, obscure_; pres. part. nipende niht,
547, 650.

nolde, from ne-wolde (_would not_); see willan.

noreth, adv., _northward_, 859.

norethan, adv., _from the north_, 547.

nose, w. f., _projection, cliff, cape_: dat. sg. of hliethes nosan, 1893; aet
brimes nosan, 2804.

no (strengthened neg.), _not, not at all, by no means_, 136, 244, 587, 755,
842, 969, 1736, etc.; strengthened by following ne, 459(?), 1509; no ... no
(_neither ... nor_), 541-543; so, no ... ne, 168. See ne.

noether (from na-hwaeether), neg., _and not, nor_, 2125.

ge-noh, adj., _sufficient, enough_: acc. sg. faehetho genoge, 2490; acc. pl.
genoge ... beagas, 3105.

non, st. f., [Eng. _noon_], ninth hour of the day, three o'clock in the
afternoon of our reckoning_ (the day was reckoned from six o'clock in the
morning; cf. Bouterwek Screadunga, 24 _2_: we hataeth aenne daeg fram sunnan
upgange oeth aefen): nom. sg. non, 1601.

nu, adv.: l) _now, at present_, 251, 254, 375, 395, 424, 426, 489, etc.: nu
gyt (_up to now, hitherto_), 957; nu gen (_now still, yet_), 2860; (_now
yet, still_), 3169.--2) conj., _since, inasmuch as_: nu þu lungre geong ...
nu se wyrm ligeeth (_go now quickly, since the dragon lieth dead_), 2746; so,
2248; þaet þu me ne forwyrne ... nu ic þus feorran com (_that do not thou
refuse me, since I am come so far_), 430; so, 1476; nu ic on maethma hord
mine bebohte frode feorh-lege, fremmaeth ge nu (_as I now..., so do ye_),
2800; so, 3021.

nymethe, conj. w. subj., _if not, unless_, 782; nymethe mec god scylde (_if God
had not shielded me_), 1659.

nyt, st. f., _duty, service, office, employment_: acc. sg. þegn nytte
beheold (_did his duty_), 494; so, 3119.--Comp.: sund-, sundor-nyt.

nyt, adj., _useful_: acc. pl. m. nytte, 795; comp. un-nyt.

ge-nyttian, w. v., _to make use of, enjoy_: pret. part. haefde eoreth-scrafa
ende ge-nyttod (_had enjoyed, made use of_), 3047.

nyd, st. f., _force, necessity, need, pain_: acc. sg. þurh deaethes nyd,
2455; instr. sg. nyde, 1006. In comp. (like nyd-maga, consanguineus, in
AEthelred's Laws, VI. 12, Schmid, p. 228; ned-maga, in Cnut's Laws, I. 7,
ibid., p. 258); also, _tie of blood._--Comp. þrea-nyd.

ge-nydan, w. v.: 1) _to force, compel_: pret. part. niethe ge-nyded (_forced
by hostile power_), 2681.--2) _to force upon_: pret. part. acc. sg. f. nyde
genydde ... gearwe stowe (_the inevitable place prepared for each_, i.e.
the bed of death), 1006.

nyd-bad, st. f., _forced pledge, pledge demanded by force_: acc. pl.
nyd-bade, 599.

nyd-gestealla, w. m., _comrade in need_ or _united by ties of blood_: nom.
pl. nyd-gesteallan, 883.

nyd-gripe, st. m., _compelling grip_: dat. sg. in nyd-gripe (mid-gripe,
MS.), 977.

nyd-wracu, st. f., _distressful persecution, great distress_: nom. sg.,
193.

nyhst. See neah.


O

oethethe, conj.: 1) _or; otherwise_, 283, 437, 636, 638, 694, 1492, 1765,
etc.--2) _and_(?), _till_(?), 650, 2476, 3007.

of, prep. w. dat., _from, off from_: 1) _from some point of view_: ge-seah
of wealle (_from the wall_), 229; so, 786; of hefene scineeth (_shineth from
heaven_), 1572; of hliethes nosan gaestas grette (_from the cliff's
projection_), 1893; of þam leoma stod (_from which light streamed_), 2770;
þaer waes maethma fela of feorwegum ... gelaeded (_from distant lands_), 37; þa
com of more (_from the moor_), 711, 922.--2) _forth from, out of_: hwearf
of earde (_wandered from his home, died_), 56; so, 265, 855, 2472; þa ic of
searwum com (_when I had escaped from the persecutions of the foe_), 419;
þa him Hroethgar gewat ... ut of healle (_out of the hall_), 664; so, 2558,
2516; 1139, 2084, 2744; wudu-rec a-stah sweart of (ofer) swioethole (_black
wood-reek ascended from the smoking fire_), 3145; (icge gold) a-haefen of
horde (_lifted from the hoard_), 1109; let þa of breostum ... word ut faran
(_from his breast_), 2551; dyde ... helm of hafelan (_doffed his helmet_),
673; so, 1130; sealdon win of wunder-fatum (_presented wine from wondrous
vessels_), 1163; siethethan hyne Haeethcyn of horn-bogan ... flane geswencte
(_with an arrow shot from the horned bow_), 2438; so, 1434. Prep.
postponed: þa he him of dyde isern-byrnan (_doffed his iron corselet_),
672.

ofer, prep. w. dat. and acc., _over, above_: 1) w. dat, _over_ (rest,
locality): Wiglaf siteeth ofer Biowulfe, 2908; ofer aeethelinge, 1245; ofer
eorethan, 248, 803, 2008; ofer wer-þeode (_over the earth, among mankind_),
900; ofer yethum, 1908; ofer hron-rade (_over the sea_), 10; so, 304, 1287,
1290, etc.; ofer ealowaege (_over the beer-cup, drinking_), 481.--2) w. acc.
of motion: a) _over_ (local): ofer yethe (_over the waves_), 46, 1910; ofer
swan-rade (_over the swan-road, the sea_), 200; ofer waegholm, 217; ofer
geofenes be-gang, 362; so, 239, 240, 297, 393, 464, 471, etc.; ofer bolcan
(_over the gangway_), 231; ofer landa fela (_over many lands_), 311; so,
1405, 1406; ofer heahne hrof (_along upon (under?) the high roof_), 984;
ofer eormen-grund (_over the whole earth_), 860; ofer ealle (_over all, on
all sides_), 2900, 650; so, 1718;--606, 900, 1706; ofer borda gebraec
(_over, above, the crashing of shields_), 2260; ofer bord-(scild) weall,
2981, 3119. Temporal: ofer þa niht (_through the night, by night_), 737. b)
w. verbs of saying, speaking, _about, of, concerning_: he ofer benne spraec,
2725. c) _beyond, over_: ofer min ge-met (_beyond my power_), 2880;--hence,
_against, contrary to_: he ofer willan giong (_went against his will_),
2410; ofer ealde riht (_against the ancient laws_, i.e. the ten
commandments), 2331;--also, _without_: wig ofer waepen (_war sans,
dispensing with, weapons_), 686;--temporal = _after_: ofer eald-gewin
(_after long, ancient, suffering_), 1782.

ofer-hygd, st. n., _arrogance, pride, conceit_: gen. pl. ofer-hygda, 1741;
ofer-hyda, 1761.

ofer-maethum, st. m., _very rich treasure_: dat. pl. ofer-maethmum, 2994.

ofer-maegen, st. n., _over-might, superior numbers_: dat. sg. mid
ofer-maegene, 2918.

ofer-þearf, st. f., _dire distress, need_: dat. sg. [for ofer] þea[rfe],
2227.

oft, adv., _often_, 4, 165, 444, 572, 858, 908, 1066, 1239, etc.; oft [no]
seldan, 2030; oft nalles aene, 3020; so, 1248, 1888. Compar. oftor, 1580.
Superl. oftost, 1664.

om-, on-. See am-, an-.

ombiht. See ambiht.

oncer. See ancer.

ond. See and.

onsyn. See ansyn.

on, prep. w. dat. and acc., signifying primarily _touching on, contact
with_: I. local, w. dat.: a) _on, upon, in at_ (of exterior surface): on
heah-stede (_in the high place_), 285; on minre eethel-tyrf (_in my native
place_), 410; on þaem meethel-stede, 1083; so, 2004; on þam holmclife, 1422;
so, 1428; on foldan (_on earth_), 1197; so, 1533, 2997; on þaere medu-bence
(_on the mead-bench_), 1053; beornas on blancum (_the heroes on the
dapple-greys_), 857, etc.; on raeste (_in bed_), 1299; on stapole (_at,
near, the pillar_), 927; on wealle, 892; on wage (_on the wall_), 1663; on
þaem wael-stenge (_on the battle-lance_), 1639; on eaxle (_on his shoulder_),
817, 1548; on bearme, 40; on breostum, 552; on hafelan, 1522; on handa (_in
his hand_), 495, 540; so, 555, 766; on him byrne scan (_on him shone the
corselet_), 405; on ore (_at the front_), 1042; on corethre (_at the head of,
among, his troop_), 1154; scip on ancre (_the ship at anchor_), 303; þaet he
on heoethe ge-stod (_until he stood in the hall_), 404; on faeder staele (_in a
father's place_), 1480; on yethum (_on the waves, in the water_), 210, 421,
534, 1438; on holme, 543; on eg-streamum, 577; on segl-rade, 1438, etc.; on
flode, 1367. The prep. postponed: Freslondum on, 2358.--b) _in, inside of_
(of inside surface): secg on searwum (_a champion in armor_), 249; so, 963;
on wig-geatwum, 368; (reced) on þaem se rica bad (_in which the mighty one
abode_), 310; on Heorote (_in Heorot_), 475, 497, 594, 1303; on beor-sele,
492, 1095; on healle, 615, 643; so, 639, 1017, 1026, etc.; on burgum (_in
the cities, boroughs_), 53; on helle, 101; on sefan minum (_in my mind_),
473; on mode, 754; so, 755, 949, 1343, 1719, etc.; on aldre (_in his
vitals_), 1435; on middan (in medio), 2706.--c) _among, amid_: on searwum
(_among the arms_), 1558; on gemonge (_among the troop_), 1644; on þam
leod-scipe (_among the people_), 2198; nymethe liges faeethm swulge on swaethule
(_unless the embracing flame should swallow it in smoke_), 783;--_in, with,
touched by, possessing something_: þa waes on salum sinces brytta (_then was
the dispenser of treasure in joy_), 608; so, 644, 2015; waes on hreon mode,
1308; on sweofote (_in sleep_), 1582, 2296; heo waes on ofste (_she was in
haste_), 1293; so, 1736, 1870; þa waes on blode brim weallende (_there was
the flood billowing in, with, blood_), 848; (he) waes on sunde (_was
a-swimming_), 1619; waes to fore-mihtig feond on feethe (_too powerful in
speed_), 971; þaer waes swigra secg ... on gylpspraece (_there was the
champion more silent in his boasting speech_), 982;--_in; full of,
representing, something_: on weres waestmum (_in man's form_), 1353.--d)
_attaching to_, hence _proceeding from; from something_: ge-hyrde on
Beowulfe faest-raedne ge-þoht (_heard in, from, B. the fixed resolve_), 610;
þaet he ne mette ... on elran men mund-gripe maran, 753;--hence, with verbs
of taking: on raeste genam (_took from his bed_), 122; so, 748, 2987; hit aer
on þe gode be-geaton (_took it before from thee_), 2249.--e) _with_: swa
hit lungre weareth on hyra sinc-gifan sare ge-endod (_as it, too, soon
painfully came to an end with the dispenser of treasure_), 2312.--f) _by_:
maeg þonne on þaem golde ongitan Geata dryhten (_the lord of the Geatas may
perceive by the gold_), 1485.--g) _to_, after weorethan: þaet he on fylle
weareth (_that he came to a fall_), 1545.

With acc.: a) w. verbs of moving, doing, giving, seeing, etc., _up to, on,
upon, in_: a-ledon þa leofne þeoden ... on bearm scipes, 35; on stefn (on
wang) stigon, 212, 225; þa him mid scoldon on flodes aeht feor ge-witan, 42;
se þe wieth Brecan wunne on sidne sae (_who strovest in a swimming-match with
B. on the broad sea_), 507, cf. 516; þaet ic on holma ge-þring eorlscipe
efnde (_that I should venture on the sea to do valiant deeds_), 2133; on
feonda geweald siethian, 809; þara þe on swylc staraeth, 997; so, 1781; on
lufan laeteeth hworfan (_lets him turn his thoughts to love?, to
possessions?_), 1729; him on mod bearn (_came into his mind, occurred to
him_), 67; raesde on þone rofan (_rushed on the powerful one_), 2691; (cwom)
on worethig (_came into the palace_), 1973; so, 27, 242, 253, 512, 539, 580,
677, 726, etc.; on weg (_away_), 764, 845, 1383, 1431, 2097.--b) _towards,
on_: gode gewyrcean ... on faeder wine (pl.), 21.--c) aim or object, _to,
for the object, for, as, in, on_: on þearfe (_in his need, in his strait_),
1457; so, on hyra man-dryhtnes miclan þearfe, 2850; wraethum on andan (_as a
terror to the foe_), 709; Hroethgar maethelode him on andsware (_said to him in
reply_), 1841; betst beado-rinca waes on bael gearu (_on the pyre ready_),
1110; wig-heafolan baer frean on fultum (_for help_), 2663; weareth on bid
wrecen (_forced to wait_), 2963.--d) ground, reason, _according to, in
conformity with_: rodera raedend hit on ryht gesced (_decided it in
accordance with right_), 1556; ne me swor fela aetha on unriht (_swore no
oaths unjustly, falsely_), 2740; on sped (_skilfully_), 874; nallas on gylp
seleeth faette beagas (_giveth no gold-wrought rings as he promised_), 1750;
on sinne selfes dom (_boastingly, at his own will_), 2148; him eal worold
wendeeth on willan (_according to his will_), 1740.--e) w. verbs of buying,
_for, in exchange for_: me ic on maethma hord mine be-bohte frode feorh-lege
(_for the hoard of jewels_), 2800.--f) _of, as to_: ic on Higelace wat,
Geata dryhten (_I know with respect to, as to, of, H._), 1831; so, 2651;
þaet heo on aenigne eorl ge-lyfde fyrena frofre (_that she should rely on any
earl for help out of trouble_), 628; þa hie ge-truwedon on twa healfa (_on
both sides, mutually_), 1096; so, 2064; þaet þu him ondraedan ne þearft ...
on þa healfe (_from, on this side_), 1676.--g) after superlatives or
virtual superlatives = _among_: naes ... sinc-maethethum selra (= þaet waes
sinc-maethma selest) on sweordes had (_there was no better jewel in sword's
shape_, i.e. among all swords there was none better), 2194; se waes Hroethgare
haeleetha leofost on ge-siethes had (_dearest of men as, in the character of,
follower_, etc.), 1298.

II. Of time: a) w. dat., _in, inside of, during, at_: on fyrste (_in time,
within the time appointed_), 76; on uhtan (_at dawn_), 126; on mergenne
(_at morn, on the morrow_), 565, 2940; on niht, 575; on wanre niht, 703; on
tyn dagum, 3161; so, 197, 719, 791, 1063, etc.; on geogoethe (_in youth_),
409, 466; on geogoeth-feore, 537; so, 1844; on orlege (_in, during, battle_),
1327; hu lomp eow on lade (_on the way_), 1988; on gange (_in going, en
route_), 1885; on sweofote (_in sleep_), 1582.--b) w. acc., _towards,
about_: on undern-mael (_in the morning, about midday_), 1429; on
morgen-tid, 484, 518; on morgen, 838; on ende-staef (_toward the end, at
last_), 1754; oftor micle þonne on aenne sieth (_far oftener than once_),
1580.

III. With particles: him on efn (_beside, alongside of, him_), 2904; on
innan (_inside, within_), 71, 1741, 1969, 2453, 2716; þaer on innan (_in
there_), 2090, 2215, 2245. With the relative þe often separated from its
case: þe ic her on starie (_that I here look on, at_), 2797; þe ge þaer on
standaeth (_that ye there stand in_), 2867.

on-cyeth (cf. Dietrich in Haupt's Zeits. XI., 412), st. f., _pain,
suffering_: nom. sg., 1421; acc. sg. or pl. on-cyethethe, 831.

on-drysne, adj., _frightful, terrible_: acc. sg. firen on-drysne, 1933.

onettan (for anettan, from root an-, Goth. inf. anan, _to breathe, pant_),
w. v., _to hasten_: pret. pl. onetton, 306, 1804.

on-licnes, st. f., _likeness, form, figure_: nom. sg., 1352.

on-medla, w. m., _pride, arrogance_: dat. sg. for on-medlan, 2927. Cf.
Bugge in Zacher's Zeits. 4, 218 seqq.

on-saege, adj., _tending to fall, fatal_: nom. sg. þa waes Hondscio (dat.)
hild on-saege, 2077; Haeethcynne weareth ... gueth on-saege, 2484.

on-weald, st. m., _power, authority_: acc. sg. (him) bega ge-hwaeethres ...
onweald ge-teah (_gave him power over, possession of, both_), 1044.

open, adj., _open_: acc. sg. hord-wynne fond ... opene standan, 2272.

openian, w. v., _to open_, w. acc.: inf. openian, 3057.

orc (O.S. orc, Goth. aurkei-s), st. m., _crock, vessel, can _: nom. pl.
orcas, 3048; acc. pl. orcas, 2761.

orcne, st. m., _sea-monster_: nom. pl. orcneas, 112.

ord, st. n. _point_: nom. sg. oeth þaet wordes ord breost-hord þurh-braec
(_till the word-point broke through his breast-hoard, came to utterance_),
2792; acc. sg. ord (_sword-point_), 1550; dat. instr. orde (id.), 556; on
orde (_at the head of, in front_ [of a troop]), 2499, 3126.

ord-fruma, w. m., _head lord, high prince_: nom. sg., 263.

oret-mecg, st. m., _champion, warrior, military retainer_: nom. pl.
oret-mecgas, 363, 481; acc. pl. oret-mecgas, 332.

oretta, w. m., _champion, fighter, hero_: nom. sg., 1533, 2539.

or-leg, st. n., _war, battle_: dat. sg. on orlege, 1327; gen. sg. or-leges,
2408.

or-leg-hwil, st. f., _time of battle, war-time_: nom. sg. [or-leg]-hwil,
2003; gen. sg. orleg-hwile, 2912; gen. pl orleg-hwila, 2428.

or-leahtre, adj., _blameless_: nom. sg 1887.

or-þanc (cf. Gloss. Aldhelm. mid or-þance = argumento in Haupt XI., 436;
orþancum = machinamentis, _ibid._ 477; or-þanc-scipe = mechanica, 479), st.
m., _mechanical art, skill_: instr. pl. or-þoncum, 2088; smiethes or-þancum,
406.

or-wena, adj. (weak form), _hopeless, despairing_, w. gen.: aldres or-wena
(_hopeless of life_), 1003, 1566.

or-wearde, adj., _unguarded, without watch_ or _guard_: adv., 3128.

orueth, st. n., _breath, snorting_: nom. sg., 2558; dat. oreethe, 2840.


O

oeth (Goth. und, O.H.G. unt, unz): 1) prep. w. acc., _to, till, up to_, only
temporal: oeth þone anne daeg, 2400; oeth domes daeg, 3070; o woruld-ende,
3084.--2) oeth þaet, conj. w. depend, indicative clause, _till, until_, 9, 56,
66, 100, 145. 219, 296, 307, etc.

oether (Goth. anþar), num.: 1) _one or other of two, a second_, = alter: nom.
sg. subs.: se oether, 2062; oether(_one_ i.e. of my blood-relations, Haeethcyn and
Hygelac), 2482; oether ... oether (_the one ... the other_), 1350-1352. Adj.:
oether ... mihtig man-sceaetha (_the second mighty, fell foe_, referring to
1350), 1339; se oether ... haele, 1816; fem. niht oether, 2118; neut. oether gear
(_the next, second, year_), 1134; acc. sg. m. oetherne, 653, 1861, 2441,
2485; þenden reafode rinc oetherne(_whilst one warrior robbed the other_,
i.e. Eofor robbed Ongenþeow), 2986; neut. oether swylc(_another such, an
equal number_), 1584; instr. sg. oethre siethe (_for the second time, again_),
2671, 3102; dat. sg. oethrum, 815, 1030, 1166, 1229, 1472, 2168, 2172, etc.;
gen. sg. m. oethres dogores, 219, 606; neut. oethres, 1875.--2) _another, a
different one_, = alius: nom. sg., subs. oether, 1756; oether naenig (_no
other_), 860. Adj.: aenig oether man, 503, 534; so, 1561; oether in (_a
different house_ or _room_), 1301; acc. sg. oether flet, 1087; gen. sg. oethres
... yrfe-weardes, 2452; acc. pl. ealo drincende oether saedan (_ale drinkers
said other things_), 1946; acc. pl. neut. word oether, 871.

ofer, st. m., _shore_: dat. sg. on ofre, 1372.

ofost, st. f., _haste_: nom. sg. ofost is selest to gecyethanne (_haste is
best to make known, best to say at once_), 256; so, 3008; dat. sg. beo þu
on ofeste (ofoste) (_be in haste, hasten_), 386, 2748; on ofste, 1293; on
ofoste, 2784, 3091.

ofost-lice, adv., _in haste, speedily_, 3131.

o-hwaer, adv., _anywhere_, 1738, 2871.

omig, adj., _rusty_: nom. sg., 2764; nom. pl. omige, 3050.

or, st. n., _beginning, origin; front_: nom. sg., 1689; acc. sg., 2408;
dat. sg. on ore, 1042.

o-wiht, _anything, aught_: instr. sg. o-wihte (_in any way_), 1823, 2433.


P

pad, st. f., _dress_; in comp. here-pad.

paeeth, st. m., _path, road, way_; in comp. an-paeeth.

plega, w. m., _play, emulous contest_; lind-plega, 1074.


R

raethe, adv., _quickly, immediately_, 725, Cf. hraethe.

rand, rond, st. m., _shield_: acc. sg, rand, 683; rond, 657, 2567, 2610;
dat. ronde (rond, MS.), 2674; under rande, 1210; bi ronde, 2539; acc. pl.
randas, 231; rondas, 326, 2654.--Comp.: bord-, hilde-, sid-rand.

rand-haebbend, pres. part., _shield-bearer_, i.e. _man at arms, warrior_:
gen. pl. rond-haebbendra, 862.

rand-wiga, w. m., _shield-warrior, shield-bearing warrior_: nom. sg., 1299;
acc. sg. rand-wigan, 1794.

rad, st. f., _road, street_; in comp. hran-, segl-, swan-rad.

ge-rad, adj., _clever, skilful, ready_: acc. pl. neut. ge-rade, 874.

rap, st. m., _rope, bond, fetter_: in comp. wael-rap.

rasian, w. v., _to find, discover_: pret. part. þa waes hord rasod, 2284.

raest. See rest.

raecan, w. v., _to reach, reach after_: pret. sg. raehte ongean feond mid
folme (_reached out his hand toward the foe_), 748.

ge-raecan, _to attain, strike, attack_: pret. sg. hyne ... waepne ge-raehte
(_struck him with his sword_), 2966; so, 556.

raed, st. m.: 1) _advice, counsel, resolution; good counsel, help_: nom. sg.
nu is raed gelong eft aet þe anum (_now is help to be found with thee
alone_), 1377; acc. sg. raed, 172, 278, 3081.--2) _advantage, gain, use_:
acc. sg. þaet raed talaeth (_counts that a gain_), 2028; ecne raed (_the eternal
gain, everlasting life_), 1202; acc. pl. ece raedas, 1761.--Comp.: folc-raed,
and adj., an-, faest-raed.

raedan, st. v., _to rule; reign; to possess_: pres. part. rodera raedend
(_the ruler of the heavens_), 1556; inf. þone þe þu mid rihte raedan
sceoldest (_that thou shouldst possess by rights_), 2057; wolde dom godes
daedum raedan gumena gehwylcum (_God's doom would rule over, dispose of,
every man in deeds_), 2859. See sele-raedend.

raed-bora, w. m. _counsellor, adviser_: nom. sg., 1326.

raeden, st. f., _order, arrangement, law_: see Note on 1143; comp.
worold-raeden(?).

a-raeran, w. v.: 1) _to raise, lift up_: pret. pl. þa waeron monige þe his
maeg ... ricone a-raerdon (_there were many that lifted up his brother
quickly_), 2984.--2) figuratively, _to spread, disseminate_: pret. part.
blaed is a-raered (_thy renown is far-spread_), 1704.

raes, st. m., _on-rush, attack, storm_: acc. sg. guethe raes (_the storm of
battle, attack_), 2627; instr. pl. guethe raesum, 2357.--Comp.: gueth-, hand-,
heaetho-, maegen-, wael-raes.

(ge-)raesan, w. v., _to rush (upon)_: pret. sg. raesde on þone rofan, 2691,
2840.

raeswa, w. m., _prince, ruler_: dat. sg. weoroda raeswan, 60.

reccan, w. v., _to explicate, recount, narrate_: inf. frum-sceaft fira
feorran reccan (_recount the origin of man from ancient times_), 91;
gerund, to lang is to reccenne, hu ic ... (_too long to tell how I_...),
2094; pret. sg. syllic spell rehte (_told a wondrous tale_), 2111; so
intrans. feorran rehte (_told of olden times_), 2107.

reced, st. n., _building, house; hall_ (complete in itself): nom. sg., 412,
771, 1800; acc. sg., 1238; dat. sg. recede, 721, 729, 1573; gen. sg.
recedes, 326, 725, 3089; gen. pl. receda, 310.--Comp.: eoreth-, heal-, horn-,
win-reced.

regn-heard, adj., _immensely strong, firm_: acc. pl. rondas regn-hearde,
326.

regnian, renian, w. v., _to prepare, bring on_ or _about_: inf. deaeth
ren[ian] hond-gesteallan (_prepare death for his comrade_), 2169.

ge-regnian, _to prepare, deck out, adorn_: pret. part. medu-benc monig ...
golde ge-regnad, 778.

regn-, ren-weard, st. m., _mighty guardian_: nom. pl. ren-weardas (of
Beowulf and Grendel contending for the possession of the hall), 771.

rest, raest, st. f.: 1) _bed, resting-place_: acc. sg. raeste, 139; dat. sg.
on raeste (genam) (_from his resting-place_), 1299, 1586; to raeste (_to
bed_), 1238. Comp.: flet-raest, sele-rest, wael-rest.--2) _repose, rest_; in
comp. aefen-raest.

ge-reste (M.H.G. reste), f., _resting-place_: in comp. wind-gereste.

restan, w. v.: 1) _to rest_: inf. restan, 1794; pret. sg. reflex. reste
hine þa rum-heort, 1800.--2) _to rest, cease_: inf., 1858.

rec (O.H.G. rouh), st. m., _reek, smoke_: instr. sg. rece, 3157.--Comp.:
wael-, wudu-rec.

recan (O.H.G. ruohjan), w. v. w. gen., _to reck, care about something, be
anxious_: pres. sg. III. waepna ne receeth (_recketh not for weapons, weapons
cannot hurt him_), 434.

reethe, adj., _wroth, furious_: nom. sg., 122, 1586; nom. pl. reethe, 771.
Also, of things, _wild, rough, fierce_: gen. sg. reethes and-hattres
(_fierce, penetrating heat_), 2524.

reaf, st. n., _booty, plunder in war; clothing, garments_ (as taken by the
victor from the vanquished): in comp. heaetho-, wael-reaf.

reafian, w. v., _to plunder, rob_, w. acc.: inf. hord reafian, 2774; pret.
sg. þenden reafode rinc oetherne, 2986; wael reafode, 3028; pret. pl. wael
reafedon, 1213.

be-reafian, w. instr., _to bereave, rob of_: pret. part. since be-reafod,
2747; golde be-reafod, 3019.

reord, st. f., _speech, language; tone of voice_: acc. sg. on-cniow mannes
reorde (_knew, heard, a human voice_), 2556.

reordian, w. v., _to speak, talk_: inf. fela reordian _(speak much_), 3026.

ge-reordian, _to entertain, to prepare for_: pret. part. þa waes eft swa aer
... flet-sittendum faegere ge-reorded (_again, as before, the guests were
hospitably entertained_), 1789

reot, st. m.?, f.?, _noise, tumult_? (_grave_?): instr. sg. reote, 2458.
Bugge, in Zachers Zeits. 4, 215, takes reote as dat. from reot (_rest,
repose_).

reoc, adj., _savage, furious_: nom. sg., 122.

be-reofan, st. v., _to rob of, bereave_: pret. part. w. instr. acc. sg.
fem. golde berofene, 2932; instr. sg. reote berofene, 2458.

reon. See rowan.

reotan, st. v., _to weep_: pres. pl. oeth þaet ... roderas reotaeth, 1377.

reow, adj., _excited, fierce, wild_: in comp. blod-, gueth-, wael-reow. See
hreow.

ricone, _hastily, quickly, immediately_, 2984.

riht, st. n., _right_ or _privilege; the_ (abstract) _right_: acc. sg. on
ryht (_according to right_), 1556; soeth and riht (_truth and right_), 1701;
dat. sg. wieth rihte, 144; aefter rihte (_in accordance with right_), 1050;
syllic spell rehte aefter rihte _(told a wondrous tale truthfully_), 2111;
mid rihte, 2057; acc. pl. ealde riht (_the ten commandments_), 2331;
--Comp. in eethel-, folc-, land-, un-, word-riht.

riht, adj., _straight, right_: in comp. up-riht.

rihte, adv., _rightly, correctly_, 1696. See aet-rihte.

rinc, st. m., _man, warrior, hero_: nom. sg., 399, 2986; also of Grendel,
721; acc. sg. rinc, 742, 748; dat. sg. rince, 953; of Hroethgar, 1678; gen.
pl. rinca, 412, 729.--Comp. in beado-, gueth-, here-, heaetho-, hilde-, mago-,
sae-rinc.

ge-risne, ge-rysne, adj., _appropriate, proper_: nom. sg. n. ge-rysne,
2654.

rice, st. n.: 1) _realm, land ruled over_: nom. sg., 2200, 2208; acc. sg.
rice, 913, 1734, 1854, 3005; gen. sg. rices, 862, 1391, 1860, 2028, 3081.
Comp. Swio-rice.--2) _council of chiefs, the king with his chosen
advisers_(?): nom. sg. oft gesaet rice to rune, 172.

rice, adj., _mighty, powerful_: nom. sg. (of Hroethgar), 1238; (of Hygelac),
1210; (of Aesc-here), 1299; weak form, se rica (Hroethgar), 310; (Beowulf),
399; (Hygelac), 1976.--Comp. gimme-rice.

ricsian, rixian, w. v. intrans., _to rule, reign_: inf. ricsian, 2212;
pret. sg. rixode, 144.

ridan, st. v., _to ride_: subj. pres. þaet his byre ride giong on galgan,
2446; pres. part. nom. pl. ridend, 2458; inf. wicge ridan, 234; mearum
ridan, 856; pret. sg. sae-genga ... se þe on ancre rad, 1884; him to-geanes
rad (_rode to meet them_), 1894; pret. pl. ymbe hlaew riodan (_rode round
the grave-mound_), 3171.

ge-ridan, w. acc., _to ride over_: pret. sg. se þe naes ge-rad (_who rode
over the promontory_), 2899.

rim, st. n., _series, number_: in comp. daeg-, un-rim.

ge-rim, st. n., _series, number_: in comp. dogor-ge-rim.

ge-riman, w. v., _to count together, enumerate in all_: pret. part. in
comp. foreth-gerimed.

a-risan, st. v., _to arise, rise_: imper. sg. a-ris, 1391; pret. sg. a-ras
þa se rica, 399; so, 652, 1791, 3031; a-ras þa bi ronde (_arose by his
shield_), 2539; hwanan sio faeheth a-ras (_whence the feud arose_), 2404.

rodor, st. m., _ether, firmament, sky_ (from _radius_?, Bugge): gen. sg.
rodores candel, 1573; nom. pl. roderas, 1377; dat. pl. under roderum, 310;
gen. pl. rodera, 1556.

rof, adj., _fierce, of fierce, heroic, strength, strong_: nom. sg., 2539;
also with gen. maegenes rof (_strong in might_), 2085; so, þeah þe he rof
sie nieth-geweorca, 683; acc. sg. rofne, 1794; on þone rofan, 2691.--Comp.:
beadu-, brego-, ellen-, heaetho-, hyge-, sige-rof.

rot, adj., _glad, joyous_: in comp. un-rot.

rowan, st. v., _to row_ (with the arms), _swim_: pret. pl. reon (for
reowon), 512, 539.

rum, st. m., _space, room_: nom. sg., 2691.

rum, adj.: 1) _roomy, spacious_: nom. sg. þuhte him eall to rum, wongas and
wic-stede (_fields and dwelling seemed to him all too broad_, i.e. could
not hide his shame at the unavenged death of his murdered son), 2462.--2)
in moral sense, _great, magnanimous, noble-hearted_: acc. sg. þurh rumne
sefan, 278.

rum-heort, adj., _big-hearted, noble-spirited_: nom. sg., 1800, 2111.

ge-rum-lic, adj., _commodious, comfortable_: compar. ge-rum-licor, 139.

run, st. f., _secrecy, secret discussion, deliberation_ or _council_: dat.
sg. ge-saet rice to rune, 172.--Comp. beado-run.

run-staef, st. m., _rune-stave, runic letter_: acc. pl. þurh run-stafas,
1696.

run-wita, w. m., _rune-wit, privy councillor, trusted adviser_: nom. sg.,
1326.

ge-rysne. See ge-risne.

ge-ryman, w. v.: 1) _to make room for, prepare, provide room_: pret. pl.
þaet hie him oether flet eal ge-rymdon, 1087; pret. part. þa waes Geat-maecgum
... benc gerymed, 492; so, 1976.--2) _to allow, grant, admit_: pret. part.
þa me ge-rymed waes (sieth) (_as access was permitted me_), 3089; þa him
gerymed weareth, þaet hie wael-stowe wealdan moston, 2984.


S

ge-saca, w. m., _opponent, antagonist, foe_: acc. sg. ge-sacan, 1774.

sacan, st. v., _to strive, contend_: inf. ymb feorh sacan, 439.

ge-sacan, _to attain, gain by contending_ (Grein): inf. gesacan sceal
sawl-berendra ... gearwe stowe _(gain the place prepared_, i.e. the
death-bed), 1005.

on-sacan: 1) (originally in a lawsuit), _to withdraw, take away, deprive
of_: pres. subj. þaette freoethuwebbe feores on-saece ... leofne mannan,
1943.--2) _to contest, dispute, withstand_: inf. þaet he saemannum on-sacan
mihte (i.e. hord, bearn, and bryde), 2955.

sacu, st. f., _strife, hostility, feud_: nom. sg., 1858, 2473; acc. sg.
saece, 154; saecce, 1978, 1990, 2348, 2500, 2563; dat. sg. aet (to) saecce,
954, 1619, 1666, 2613, 2660, 2682, 2687; gen. sg. secce, 601; gen. pl.
saecca, 2030.

ge-sacu, st. f., _strife, enmity_: nom. sg., 1738.

sadol, st. m., _saddle_: nom. sg., 1039.

sadol-beorht, adj., _with bright saddles_ (?): acc. pl. sadol-beorht, 2176.

ge-saga. See secgan.

samne, somne, adv., _together, united_; in aet-somne, _together, united_,
307, 402, 491, 544, 2848.

to-somne (_together_), 3123; þa se wyrm ge-beah snude to-somne (_when the
dragon quickly coiled together_), 2569.

samod, somod: I. adv., _simultaneously, at the same time_: somod, 1212,
1615, 2175, 2988; samod, 2197; samod aet-gaedere, 387, 730, 1064.--II. prep.
w. dat., _with, at the same time with_: samod aer-daege (_with the break of
day_), 1312; somod aer-daege, 2943.

sand, st. n., _sand, sandy shore_: dat. sg. on sande, 295, 1897, 3043(?);
aefter sande (_along the shore_), 1965; wieth sande, 213.

sang, st. m., _song, cry, noise_: nom. sg. sang, 1064; swutol sang scopes,
90; acc. sg. sige-leasne sang (Grendel's cry of woe), 788; sarigne sang
(Hreethel's dirge for Herebeald), 2448.

sal, st. m., _rope_: dat. sg. sale, 1907; on sale (sole, MS.), 302.

sal. See sael.

sar, st. n., _wound, pain_ (physical or spiritual): nom. sg. sar, 976; sio
sar, 2469; acc. sg. sar, 788; sare, 2296; dat. (instr.) sg. sare, 1252,
2312, 2747.--Comp. lic-sar.

sar, adj., _sore, painful_: instr. pl. sarum wordum, 2059.

sare, adv., _sorely, heavily, ill_, graviter: se þe him [sa]re gesceod
(_who injured him sorely_), 2224.

sarig, adj., _painful, woeful_: acc. sg. sarigne sang, 2448.

sarig-fereth, adj., _sore-hearted, grieved_: nom. sg. sarig-fereth (Wiglaf),
2864.

sarig-mod, adj., _sorrowful-minded, saddened_: dat. pl. sarig-modum, 2943.

sar-lic, adj., _painful_: nom. sg., 843; acc. sg. neut., 2110.

sawol, sawl, st. f., _soul_ (the immortal principle as contrasted with lif,
the physical life): nom. sg. sawol, 2821; acc. sg. sawle, 184, 802; haeethene
sawle, 853; gen. sg. sawele, 1743; sawle, 2423.

sawl-berend, pres. part., _endowed with a soul, human being_: gen. pl.
sawl-berendra, 1005.

sawul-dreor, st. n., (blood gushing from the seat of the soul), _soul-gore,
heart's blood, life's blood_: instr. sg. sawul-driore, 2694.

sawul-leas, adj., _soulless, lifeless_: acc. sg. sawol-leasne, 1407;
sawul-leasne, 3034.

saece, saecce. See sacu.

saed, adj., _satiated, wearied_: in comp. hilde-saed.

sael, st. n., _habitable space, house_, _hall_: dat. sg. sel, 167; sael, 307,
2076, 2265.

saeld, st. n., _hall, king's hall_ or _palace_: acc. sg. geond þaet saeld
(Heorot), 1281.

sae, st. m. and f., _sea, ocean_: nom. sg., 579, 1224; acc. sg. on sidne sae,
507; ofer sae, 2381; ofer sae side, 2395; dat. sg. to sae, 318; on sae, 544;
dat. pl. be saem tweonum, 859, 1298, 1686, 1957.

sae-bat, st. m., _sea-boat_: acc. sg., 634, 896.

sae-cyning, st. m., _sea-king, king ruling the sea_: gen. pl. sae-cyninga,
2383.

sae-deor, st. n., _sea-beast, sea-monster_: nom. sg., 1511.

sae-draca, w. m., _sea-dragon_: acc. pl. sae-dracan, 1427.

ge-saegan, w. v., _to fell, slay_: pret. part. haefdon eal-fela eotena cynnes
sweordum ge-saeged (_felled with the sword_), 885.

saege. See on-saege.

sae-genga, w. m., _sea-goer_, i.e. sea-going ship: nom. sg., 1883, 1909.

sae-geap, adj., _spacious_ (broad enough for the sea): nom. sg. sae-geap
naca, 1897.

sae-grund, st. m., _sea-bottom, ocean-bottom_: dat. sg. sae-grunde, 564.

sael, sal, sel, st. f.: 1) _favorable opportunity, good_ or _fit time_: nom.
sg. sael, 623, 1666, 2059; sael and mael, 1009; acc. sg. sele, 1136; gen. pl.
saela and maela, 1612.--2) _Fate_(?): see Note on l. 51.--3) _happiness,
joy_: dat. pl. on salum, 608; saelum, 644, 1171, 1323. See sel, adj.

ge-saelan, w. v., _to turn out favorably, succeed_: pret. sg. him ge-saelde
þaet ...(_he was fortunate enough to_, etc.), 891; so, 574; efne swylce
maela, swylce hira man-dryhtne þearf ge-saelde (_at such times as need
disposed it for their lord_), 1251.

saelan (see sal), w. v., _to tie, bind_: pret. sg. saelde ... sieth-faeethme scip,
1918; pl. sae-wudu saeldon, 226.

ge-saelan, _to bind together, weave, interweave_: pret. part. earm-beaga
fela searwum ge-saeled (_many curiously interwoven armlets_, i.e. made of
metal wire: see Guide to Scandinavian Antiquities, p. 48), 2765.

on-saelan, with acc., _to unbind, unloose, open_: on-sael meoto, sige-hreeth
secgum (_disclose thy views to the men, thy victor's courage_; or, _thy
presage of victory_?), 489.

sae-lac, st. n., _sea-gift, sea-booty_: instr. sg. sae-lace, 1625; acc. pl.
þas sae-lac, 1653.

sae-lad, st. f., _sea-way, sea-journey_: dat. sg. sae-lade, 1140, 1158.

sae-liethend, pres. part., _seafarer_: nom. pl. sae-liethend, 411, 1819, 2807;
sae-liethende, 377.

sae-man, m., _sea-man, sea-warrior_: dat. pl. sae-mannum, 2955; gen. pl.
sae-manna, 329 (both times said of the Geatas).

saemra, weak adj. compar., _the worse, the weaker_: nom. sg. saemra, 2881;
dat. sg. saemran, 954.

sae-meethe, adj., _sea-weary, exhausted by sea-travel_: nom. pl. sae-meethe, 325.

sae-naes, st. m., _sea-promontory, cape, naze_: acc. pl. sae-naessas, 223, 571.

saene, adj., _careless, slow_: compar. sg. nom. he on holme waes sundes þe
saenra, þe hyne swylt fornam (_was the slower in swimming in the sea, whom
death took away_), 1437.

sae-rinc, st. m., _sea-warrior_ or _hero_: nom. sg., 691.

sae-sieth, st. m., _sea-way, path, journey_: dat. sg. aefter sae-siethe, 1150.

sae-wang, st. m., _sea-shore_ or _beach_: acc. sg. sae-wong, 1965.

sae-weal, st. m., _(sea-wall), seashore_: dat. sg. sae-wealle, 1925.

sae-wudu, st. m., _(sea-wood), vessel, ship_: acc. sg. sae-wudu, 226.

sae-wylm, st. m., _sea-surf, billow_: acc. pl. ofer sae-wylmas, 393.

scacan, sceacan, st. v., properly, _to shake one's self_; hence, _to go,
glide, pass along_ or _away_: pres. sg. þonne min sceaceeth lif of lice,
2743; inf. þa com beorht [sunne] scacan [ofer grundas], (_the bright sun
came gliding over the fields_), 1804; pret. sg. dugueth ellor scoc _(the
chiefs are gone elsewhither_, i.e. have died), 2255; þonne straela storm ...
scoc ofer scild-weall (_when the storm of arrows leapt over the wall of
shields_), 3119; pret. part. waes hira blaed scacen (_their bravest men had
passed away_), 1125; þa waes winter scacen (_the winter was past_), 1137;
so, sceacen, 2307, 2728.

scadu, sceadu, st. f., _shadow, concealing veil of night_: acc. sg. under
sceadu bregdan (i.e. kill), 708.

scadu-genga, w. m., _shadow-goer, twilight-stalker_ (of Grendel): nom. sg.
sceadu-genga, 704.

scadu-helm, st. m., _shadow-helm, veil of darkness_: gen. pl. scadu-helma
ge-sceapu (_shapes of the shadow, evil spirits wandering by night_), 651.

scalu, st. f., _retinue, band_ (part of an armed force); in comp.
hand-scalu: mid his hand-scale (hond-scole), 1318, 1964.

scamian, w. v., _to be ashamed_: pres. part. nom. pl. scamiende, 2851; no
he þaere feoh-gyfte ... scamigan þorfte (_needed not be ashamed of his
treasure-giving_), 1027.

scawa (see sceawlan), w. m., _observer, visitor_: nom. pl. scawan, 1896.

ge-scad, st. n., _difference, distinction_: acc. sg. aeg-hwaeethres gescad,
worda and worca (_difference between, of, both words and deeds_), 288.

ge-scadan, st. v., _to decide, adjudge_: pret. sg. rodera raedend hit on
ryht gesced (_decided it in accordance with right_), 1556.

scanan? See scinan, pret. pl. scionon, 303; the imaginary scanan having
been abandoned.

ge-scaep-hwile, st. f., _fated hour, hour of death (appointed rest?)_: dat.
sg. to gescaep-hwile (_at the fated hour_), 26.

sceethethan, w. v., _to scathe, injure_: inf. w. dat. pers., 1034; aldre
sceethethan (_hurt her life_), 1525; þaet on land Dena laethra naenig mid scipherge
sceethethan ne meahte (_injure through robber incursions_), 243; pret. sg. þaer
him naenig waeter wihte ne sceethede, 1515.

ge-sceethethan, the same: inf. þaet him ... ne mihte eorres inwit-feng aldre
gesceethethan, 1448.

scenc, st. m., _vessel, can_: in comp. medu-scenc.

scencan, w. v., _to hand drink, pour out_: pret. sg. scencte scir wered,
496 (cf. skinker = cup-bearer).

scenne, w. f.?, _sword-guard?_: dat. pl. on þaem scennum sciran goldes,
1695.

sceran, st. v., _to shear off, cleave, hew to pieces_: pres. sg. þonne
heoru bunden ... swin ofer helme andweard scireeth (_hews off the boar-head
on the helm_), 1288.

ge-sceran, _to divide, hew in two_: pret. sg. helm oft ge-scaer (_often
clove the helm in two_), 1527; so, gescer, 2974.

scerwen, st. f.?, in comp. ealu-scerwen (_ale-scare_ or _panic_?), 770.

scet. See sceotan.

sceadu. See scadu.

sceaetha, w. m.: 1) _scather, foe_: gen. pl. sceaethena, 4.--2) _fighter,
warrior_: nom. pl. scaethan, 1804.--Comp.: attor-, dol-, feond-, gueth-,
hearm-, leod-, man-, sin-, þeod-, uht-sceaetha.

sceaethan, st. v. w. dat., _to scathe, injure, crush_: pret. sg. se þe oft
manegum scod (_which has oft oppressed many_), 1888.

ge-sceaethan, w. dat., the same: pret. sg. swa him aer gescod hild aet Heorote,
1588; se þe him sare ge-sceod (_who injured him sorely_), 2224; no þy aer in
gescod halan lice, 1503; bill aer gescod eald-hlafordes þam þara maethma
mund-bora waes (_the weapon of the ancient chieftain had before laid low the
dragon, the guardian of the treasure_), 2778 (or, _sheathed in brass_?, if
aer and gescod form compound).

sceaethen-mael, st. n., _deadly weapon, hostile sword_: nom. sg., 1940.

sceaft, st. m., _shaft, spear, missile_: nom. sg. sceft, 3119.--Comp.:
here-, wael-sceaft.

ge-sceaft, st. f.: 1) _creation, earth, earthly existence_: acc. sg. þas
laenan ge-sceaft, 1623.--2) _fate, destiny_: in comp. foreth-, lif-,
mael-gesceaft.

scealc, st. m., _servant, military retainer_: nom. sg., 919; (of Beowulf),
940.--Comp beor-scealc.

ge-sceap, st. n.: 1) _shape, creature_: nom. pl. scadu-helma ge-sceapu,
651.--2) _fate, providence_: acc. sg. heah ge-sceap (_heavy fate_), 3085.

sceapan, sceppan, scyppan, st. v., _to shape, create, order, arrange,
establish_: pres. part. scyppend (_the Creator_), 106; pret. sg. scop him
Heort naman (_shaped, gave, it the name Heorot_), 78; pres. part. waes sio
wroht scepen heard wieth Hugas, syethethan Hygelac cwom (_the contest with the
Hugas became sharp after H. had come_), 2915.

ge-sceapan, _to shape, create_: pret. sg. lif ge-sceop cynna gehwylcum, 97.

scear, st. m., _massacre_: in comp. gueth-, inwit-scear, 2429, etc.

scearp, adj., _sharp, able, brave_: nom. sg. scearp scyld-wiga,
288.--Comp.: beadu-, heaetho-scearp.

scearu, st. f., _division, body, troop_: in comp. folc-scearu; _that is
decided_ or _determined_, in gueth-scearu (_overthrow_?), 1214.

sceat, st. m., _money_; also _unit of value in appraising_ (cf. Rieger in
Zacher's Zeits. 3, 415): acc. pl. sceattas, 1687. When numbers are given,
sceat appears to be left out, cf. 2196, 2995 (see þusend).--Comp.
gif-sceat.

sceat, st. m., _region, field_: acc. pl. gefraetwade foldan sceatas leomum
and leafum, 96;--_top, surface, part_: gen. pl. eorethan sceata, 753.

sceawere, st. m., _observer, spy_: nom. pl. sceaweras, 253.

sceawian, w. v. w. acc., _to see, look at, observe_: inf. sceawian, 841,
1414, 2403, 2745, 3009, 3033; sceawigan, 1392; pres. sg. II. þaet ge genoge
nean sceawiaeth beagas and brad gold, 3105; subj. pres. þaet ic ... sceawige
swegle searo-gimmas, 2749; pret. sg. sceawode, 1688, 2286, 2794; sg. for
pl., 844; pret. pl. sceawedon, 132, 204, 984, 1441.

ge-sceawian, _to see, behold, observe_: pret. part. ge-sceawod, 3076, 3085.

sceorp, st. n., _garment_: in comp. hilde-sceorp.

sceotan, st. v., _to shoot, hurl missiles_: pres. sg. se þe of flan-bogan
fyrenum sceoteeth, 1745; pres. part. nom. pl. sceotend (_the warriors,
bowmen_), 704, 1155; dat. pl. for sceotendum (MS. scotenum), 1027.

ge-sceotan, w. acc., _to shoot off, hurry_: pret. sg. hord eft gesceat
(_the dragon darted again back to the treasure_), 2320.

of-sceotan, _to kill by shooting_: pret. sg. his maeg of-scet ... blodigan
gare _(killed his brother with bloody dart_), 2440.

scild, scyld, st. m., _shield_: nom. sg. scyld, 2571; acc. sg. scyld, 437,
2076; acc. pl. scyldas, 325, 333, 2851.

scildan, scyldan, w. v., _to shield, protect_: pret. subj. nymethe mec god
scylde (_if God had not shielded me_), 1659.

scild-freca, w. m., _shield-warrior_ (warrior armed with a shield): nom.
sg. scyld-freca, 1034.

scild-weall, st. m., _wall of shields_: acc. sg. scild-weall, 3119.

scild-wiga, w. m., _shield-warrior_: nom. sg. scyld-wiga, 288.

scinna, w. m., _apparition, evil spirit_: dat. pl. scynnum, 940.

scip, st. n., _vessel, ship_: nom. sg., 302; acc. sg., 1918; dat. sg. to
scipe, 1896; gen. sg. scipes, 35, 897; dat pl. to scypum (scypon, MS.),
1155.

scip-here, st. m., (exercitus navalis) _armada, fleet_: dat. sg. mid
scip-herge, 243.

ge-scife (for ge-scyfe), adj., _advancing_ (of the dragon's movement),
2571; = G. _schief_?

scinan, st. v., _to shine, flash_: pres. sg. sunne ... suethan scineeth, 607;
so, 1572; inf. geseah blacne leoman beorhte scinan, 1518; pret. sg.
(gueth-byrne, woruld--candel) scan, 321, 1966; on him byrne scan, 405; pret.
pl. gold-fag scinon web aefter wagum, 995; scionon, 303.

scir, adj., _sheer, pure, shining_: nom. sg. hring-iren scir, 322; scir
metod, 980; acc. sg. n. scir wered, 496; gen. sg. sciran goldes, 1695.

scir-ham, adj., _bright-armored, clad in bright mail_: nom. pl. scir-hame,
1896.

scoten. See sceoten.

ge-scod, pret. part., _shod_ (calceatus), _covered_: in comp.
aer-ge-scod(?). See ge-sceaethan, and Note.

scop, st. m., _singer, shaper, poet_: nom. sg., 496, 1067; gen. sg. scopes,
90.

scraef, st. n., _hole in the earth, cavern_: in comp. eoreth-scraef.

scriethan, st. v., _to stride, go_: pres. pl. scriethaeth, 163; inf. scriethan,
651, 704; scriethan to, 2570.

scrifan, st. v., _to prescribe, impose_ (punishment): inf. hu him (Grendel)
scir metod scrifan wille, 980.

for-scrifan, w. dat. pers., _to proscribe, condemn_: pret. part. siethethan him
scyppend for-scrifen haefde, 106.

ge-scrifan, _to permit, prescribe_: pret. sg. swa him Wyrd ne ge-scraf (_as
Weird did not permit him_), 2575.

scrud, st. m., _clothing, covering; ornament_: in comp. beadu-,
byrdu-scrud.

scucca, w. m., _shadowy sprite, demon_: dat. pl. scuccum, 940.

sculan, aux. v. w. inf.: 1) _shall, must_ (obligation): pres. sg. I., III.
sceal, 20, 24, 183, 251, 271, 287, 440, 978, 1005, 1173, 1387, 1535, etc.;
scel, 455, 2805, 3011; II. scealt, 589, 2667; subj. pres. scyle, 2658;
scile, 3178; pret. ind. sg. I., III. scolde, 10, 806, 820, 966, 1071, 1444,
1450, etc.; sceolde, 2342, 2409, 2443, 2590, 2964; II. sceoldest, 2057; pl.
scoldon, 41, 833, 1306, 1638; subj. pret. scolde, 1329, 1478; sceolde,
2709.--2) w. inf. following it expresses futurity, = _shall, will_: pres.
sg. I., III. sceal beodan (_shall offer_), 384; so, 424, 438, 602, 637,
1061, 1707, 1856, 1863, 2070; sceall, 2499, 2509, etc.; II. scealt, 1708;
pl. wit sculon, 684; subj. pret. scolde, 280, 692, 911; sceolde, 3069.--3)
sculan sometimes forms a periphrastic phrase or circumlocution for a simple
tense, usually with a slight feeling of obligation or necessity: pres. sg.
he ge-wunian sceall (_he inhabits; is said to inhabit?_), 2276; pret. sg.
se þe waeter-egesan wunian scolde, 1261; waecnan scolde (_was to awake_), 85;
se þone gomelan gretan sceolde (_was to, should, approach_), 2422; þaet se
byrn-wiga bugan sceolde (_the corseleted warrior had to bow, fell_), 2919;
pl. þa þe beado-griman bywan sceoldon (_they that had to polish or deck the
battle-masks_), 2258; so, 230, 705, 1068.--4) w. omitted inf., such as
wesan, gangan: unc sceal worn fela maethma ge-maenra (i.e. wesan). 1784; so,
2660; sceal se hearda helm ... faetum befeallen (i.e. wesan), 2256; ic him
aefter sceal (i.e. gangan), 2817; subj. þonne þu foreth scyle (i.e. gangan),
1180. A verb or inf. expressed in an antecedent clause is not again
expressed with a subsequent sceal: gaeeth a Wyrd swa hio scel (_Weird goeth
ever as it shall_ [go]), 455; gueth-bill ge-swac swa hit no sceolde (i.e.
ge-swican), 2586.

scua, w. m., _shadowy demon_: in comp. deaeth-scua.

scufan, st. v.: 1) intrans., _to move forward, hasten_: pret. part. þa waes
morgen-leoht scofen and scynded, 919.--2) w. acc., _to shove, push_: pret.
pl. guman ut scufon ... wudu bundenne (_pushed the vessel from the land_),
215; dracan scufun ... ofer weall-clif (_pushed the dragon over the
wall-like cliff_), 3132. See wid-scofen(?)

be-scufan, w. acc., _to push, thrust down, in_: inf. wa bieth þaem þe sceal
... sawle be-scufan in fyres faeethm (_woe to him that shall thrust his soul
into fire's embrace_), 184.

scur, st. m., _shower, battle-shower_: in comp. isern-scur.

scur-heard, adj., _fight-hardened? (file-hardened?_): nom. pl. scur-heard,
1034.

scyld, scyldan. See scild, scildan.

scyldig, adj., _under obligations_ or _bound for; guilty of_, w. gen. and
instr.: ealdres (morethres) scyldig, 1339, 1684, 2062; synnum scyldig
(_guilty of evil deeds_), 3072.

scyndan, w. v., _to hasten_: inf. scyndan, 2571; pret. part, scynded, 919

scynna. See scinna.

scyppend. See sceapan.

scyran, w. v., _to arrange, decide_: inf. þaet hit sceaethen-mael scyran moste
(_that the sword must decide it_), 1940. O.N. skora, _to score, decide_.

scyne, adj., _sheen, well-formed, beautiful_: nom. sg. maegeth scyne, 3017.

se, pron. dem. and article, _the_: m. nom., 79, 84, 86, 87, 90, 92, 102,
etc.; fem, seo, 66, 146, etc.; neut. þaet;--relative: se (_who_), 1611,
2866; se þe (_he who_), 2293; seo þe (_she who_), 1446; se þe (for seo þe),
1345, 1888, 2686; cf. 1261, 1498; (Grendel's mother, as a wild, demonic
creature, is conceived now as man, now as woman: woman, as having borne a
son; man, as the incarnation of savage cunning and power); se for seo,
2422; dat. sg. þam (for þam þe), 2780.

secce. See sacu.

secg, st. m., _man, warrior, hero, spokesman_ (secgan?): nom. sg., 208,
872, 2228, 2407, etc.; (Beowulf), 249, 948, 1312, 1570, 1760, etc.;
(Wulfgar), 402; (Hunfereth), 981; (Wiglaf), 2864; acc. sg. sinnigne secg
(Grendel's mother, cf. se), 1380; dat. sg. secge, 2020; nom. pl. secgas,
213, 2531, 3129; dat. pl. secgum, 490; gen. pl. secga, 634, 843, 997, 1673.

secg, st. f., _sword_ (sedge?): acc. sg. secge, 685.

secgan, w. v., _to say, speak_: 1) w. acc.: pres. sg. gode ic þanc secge,
1998; so, 2796; pres. part. swa se secg hwata secgende waes laethra spella
(partitive gen.), 3029; inf. secgan, 582, 876, 881, 1050; pret. sg. saegde
him þaes leanes þanc, 1810; pret. sg. II. hwaet þu worn fela ... saegdest from
his siethe, 532.--2) without acc inf. swa we soethlice secgan hyrdon, 273;
pret. sg. saegde, 2633, 2900--3) w. depend. clause: pres. sg. ic secge, 591;
pl. III. secgaeth, 411; inf. secgan, 51, 391, 943, 1347, 1701, 1819, 2865,
3027; gerund. to secganne, 473, 1725; pret. sg. saegde, 90, 1176; pl.
saegdon, 377, 2188; saedan, 1946.

a-secgan (edicere), _to say out, deliver_: inf. wille ic a-secgan suna
Healfdenes ... min aerende, 344.

ge-secgan, _to say, relate_: imper. sg. II. ge-saga, 388; þaet ic his aerest
þe eft ge-saegde (_that I should, after, tell thee its origin_), 2158; pret.
part. gesaegd, 141; gesaed, 1697.

sefa, w. m., _heart, mind, soul, spirit_: nom. sg., 49, 490, 595, 2044,
2181, 2420, 2601, 2633; acc. sg. sefan, 278, 1727, 1843; dat. sg. sefan,
473, 1343, 1738.--Comp. mod-sefa.

ge-segen, st. f., _legend, tale_: in comp. eald-ge-segen.

segl, st. n., _sail_: nom. sg., 1907.

segl-rad, st. f., _sail-road_, i.e. sea: dat. sg. on segl-rade, 1430.

segn, st. n., _banner_, vexillum: nom. sg., 2768, 2959; acc. sg. segen, 47,
1022; segn, 2777; dat. sg. under segne, 1205.--Comp. heafod-segn.

sel, st. n., _hall, palace_. See sael.

seld, st. n., _dwelling, house_: in comp. medu-seld.

ge-selda, w. m., contubernalis, _companion_: acc. sg. geseldan, 1985.

seldan, adv., _seldom_: oft [no] seldan, 2030.

seld-guma, w. m., _house-man, home-stayer(?); common man?, house-carl?_:
nom. sg., 249.

sele, st. m. and n., _building consisting of one apartment; apartment,
room_: nom. sg., 81, 411; acc. sg. sele, 827, 2353; dat. sg. to sele, 323,
1641; in (on, to) sele þam hean, 714, 920, 1017, 1985; on sele (_in the den
of the dragon_), 3129.--Comp.: beah-, beor-, dryht-, eoreth-, gest-, gold-,
grund-, gueth-, heah-, hring-, hrof-, nieth-, win-sele.

sele-dream, st. m., _hall-glee, joy in the hall_: acc. sg. þara þe þis lif
ofgeaf, gesawon sele-dream (referring to the joy of heaven?), 2253.

sele-ful, st. n., _hall-goblet_: acc. sg., 620.

sele-gyst, st. m., _hall-guest, stranger in hall_ or _house_: acc. sg. þone
sele-gyst, 1546.

sele-raedend, pres. part., _hall-ruler, possessor of the hall_: nom. pl.,
51; acc. leode mine sele-raedende, 1347.

sele-rest, st. f., _bed in the hall_: acc. sg. sele-reste, 691.

sele-þegn, st. m., _retainer, hall-thane, chamberlain_: nom. sg., 1795.

sele-weard, st. m., _hall-ward, guardian of the hall_: acc. sg., 668.

self, sylf, pron., _self_: nom. sg. strong form, self, 1314, 1925 (?
selfa); þu self, 595; þu þe self, 954; self cyning (_the king himself, the
king too_), 921, 1011; sylf, 1965; in weak form, selfa, 1469; he selfa, 29,
1734; þaem þe him selfa deah (_that can rely upon, trust to, himself_),
1840; seolfa, 3068; he sylfa, 505; god sylfa, 3055; acc. sg. m. selfne,
1606; hine selfne (_himself_), 962; hyne selfne (_himself_, reflex.), 2876;
wieth sylfne (_beside_), 1978; gen. sg. m. selfes, 701, 896; his selfes,
1148; on sinne sylfes dom (_at his own will_), 2148; sylfes, 2224, 2361,
2640, 2711, 2777, 3014; his sylfes, 2014, 2326; fem. hire selfre, 1116;
nom. pl. selfe, 419; Sueth-Dene sylfe, 1997.

ge-sella, w. m., _house-companion, comrade_: in comp. hand-gesella.

sellan, syllan, w. v.: 1) w. acc. of thing, dat. of pers., _to give,
deliver; permit, grant, present_: pres. sg. III. seleeth him on eethle eorethan
wynne, 1731; inf. syllan, 2161, 2730; pret. sg. sealde, 72, 673, 1272,
1694, 1752, 2025, 2156, 2183, 2491, 2995; nefne god sylfa sealde þam þe he
wolde hord openian (_unless God himself gave to whom he would to open the
hoard_), 3056; pret. sg. II. sealdest, 1483.--2) _to give, give up_ (only
w. acc. of thing): aer he feorh seleeth (_he prefers to give up his life_),
1371; nallas on gylp seleeth faette beagas (_giveth out gold-wrought rings_,
etc.), 1750; pret. sg. sinc-fato sealde, 623; pl. byrelas sealdon win of
wunder-fatum, 1162.

ge-sellan, w. acc. and dat. of pers., _to give, deliver; grant, present_:
inf. ge-sellan, 1030; pret. sg. ge-sealde, 616, 1053, 1867, 1902, 2143,
etc.

sel-lic, syl-lic (from seld-lic), adj., _strange, wondrous_: nom. sg. glof
... syllic, 2087; acc. sg. n. syllic spell, 2110; acc. pl. sellice
sae-dracan, 1427. Compar. acc. sg. syllicran wiht (the dragon), 3039.

semninga, adv., _straightway, at once_ 645, 1641, 1768.

sendan, w. v. w. acc. of thing and dat. of pers., _to send_: pret. sg. þone
god sende folce to frofre (_whom God sent as a comfort to the people_), 13;
so, 471, 1843.

for-sendan, _to send away, drive off_ pret. part. he weareth on feonda
geweald ... snude for-sended, 905.

on-sendan, _to send forth, away_, w. acc. of thing and dat. of pers.:
imper. sg. on-send, 452, 1484; pret. sg. on-sende, 382; pl. þe hine ...
foreth on-sendon aenne ofer yethe (_who sent him forth alone over the sea_), 45;
pret. part. bealo-cwealm hafaeth fela feorh-cynna feorr on-sended, 2267.

sendan (cf. Gl. Aldhelm, sanda = ferculorum, epularum, in Haupt IX. 444),
w. v., _to feast, banquet_: pres. sg. III. sendeeth, 601.--Leo.

serce, syrce, w. f., _sark, shirt of mail_: nom. sg. syrce, 1112; nom. pl.
syrcan, 226; acc. pl. graege syrcan, 334.--Comp.: beadu-, heoro-serce;
here-, leoetho-, lic-syrce.

sess, st. m., _seat, place for sitting_: dat. sg. sesse, 2718; þa he bi
sesse geong (_by the seat_, i.e. before the dragon's lair), 2757.

setl, st. n., _seat, settle_: acc. sg., 2014; dat. sg. setle, 1233, 1783,
2020; gen. sg. setles, 1787; dat. pl. setlum, 1290.--Comp.: heah-, hilde-,
meodu-setl.

settan, w. v., _to set_: pret. sg. setton sae-meethe side scyldas ... wieth þaes
recedes weall (_the sea-wearied ones set their broad shields against the
wall of the hall_), 325; so, 1243.

a-settan, _to set, place, appoint_: pret. pl. hie him a-setton segen
[gyl]-denne heah ofer heafod, 47; pret. part. haefde kyninga wuldor Grendle
to-geanes ... sele-weard a-seted, 668.

be-settan, _to set with, surround_: pret. sg. (helm) besette swin-licum
(_set the helm with swine-bodies_), 1454.

ge-settan: 1) _to set, set down_: pret. part. swa waes ...þurh run-stafas
rihte ge-mearcod, ge-seted and ge-saed (_thus was ... in rune-staves rightly
marked, set down and said_), 1697.--2) _to set, ordain, create_: pret. sg.
ge-sette ... sunnan and monan leoman to leohte land-buendum, 94.--3) =
componere, _to lay aside, smooth over, appease_: pret. sg. þaet he mid þy
wife wael-faehetha ... dael ... ge-sette, 2030.

secan, w. v., _to follow after_, hence: 1) _to seek, strive for_, w. acc.:
pret. sg. sinc-faet sohte _(sought the costly cup_), 2301; ne sohte
searo-niethas, 2739; so, 3068. Without acc.: þonne his myne sohte (_than his
wish demanded_), 2573; hord-weard sohte georne aefter grunde (_the
hoard-warden sought eagerly along the ground_), 2294.--2) _to look for,
come_ or _go some whither, attain something_, w. acc.: pres. sg. III. se þe
... biorgas seceeth, 2273; subj. þeah þe haeeth-stapa holt-wudu sece, 1370;
imper. sec gif þu dyrre (_look for her_, i.e. Grendel's mother, _if thou
dare_), 1380; inf. secean, 200, 268, 646, 1598, 1870, 1990, 2514(?), 3103,
etc.; secan, 665, 1451; drihten secean (_seek, go to, the Lord_), 187;
secean wyn-leas wic (_Grendel was to seek a joyless place_, i.e. Hell),
822; so, secan deofla gedraeg, 757; sawle secan (_seek the life, kill_),
802; so, secean sawle hord, 2423; gerund. saecce to seceanne, 2563; pret.
sg. I., III. sohte, 139, 208, 376, 417, 2224; II. sohtest, 458; pl. sohton,
339.--3) _to seek, attack_: þe us seceaeth to Sweona leode, 3002; pret. pl.
hine wraec-maecgas ofer sae sohtan, 2381.

ge-secan: 1) _to seek_, w. acc.: inf. gif he gesecean dear wig ofer waepen,
685.--2) _to look for, come_ or _go to attain_, w. acc.: inf. ge-secean,
693; gerund, to ge-secanne, 1923; pret. sg. ge-sohte, 463, 520, 718, 1952;
pret. part. nom. pl. feor-cyethethe beoeth selran ge-sohte þam þe hine selfa
deah, 1840.--3) _to seek with hostile intent, to attack_: pres. sg.
ge-seceeth 2516; pret. sg. ge-sohte, 2347; pl. ge-sohton, 2927; ge-sohtan,
2205.

ofer-secan, w. acc., _to surpass, outdo_ (in an attack): pres. sg. waes sio
hond to strong, se þe meca gehwane ... swenge ofer-sohte, þonne he to saecce
baer waepen wundrum heard (_too strong was the hand, that surpassed every
sword in stroke, when he_ [Beowulf] _bore the wondrous weapon to battle_,
i.e. the hand was too strong for any sword; its strength made it useless in
battle), 2687.

sel, st. f. See sael.

sel, sael, adj., _good, excellent, fit_, only in compar.: nom. sg. m. selra,
861, 2194; þaem þaer selra waes (_to the one that was the better_, i.e.
Hygelac), 2200; deaeth bieth sella þonne edwit-lif, 2891; neut. selre, 1385;
acc. sg. m. selran þe (_a better than thee_), 1851; selran, 1198; neut. þaet
selre, 1760; dat. sg. m. selran sweord-frecan, 1469; nom. pl. fem. selran,
1840. Superl., strong form: nom. sg. neut. selest, 173, 1060; husa selest,
146, 285, 936; ofost is selest, 256; bolda selest, 2327; acc. sg. neut.
hraegla selest, 454; husa selest, 659; billa selest, 1145;--weak form: nom.
sg. m. reced selesta, 412; acc. sg. m. þone selestan, 1407, 2383; (þaes,
MS.), 1957; dat. sg. m. þaem selestan, 1686; nom. pl. selestan, 416; acc.
pl. þa selestan, 3123.

sel, compar. adv., _better, fitter, more excellent_, 1013, 2531; ne byeth him
wihte þe sel (_he shall be nought the better for it_), 2278; so, 2688.

sealma (Frisian selma, in bed-selma), w. m., _bed-chamber, sleeping-place_:
acc. sg. on sealman, 2461.

sealt, adj., _salty_: acc. sg. neut. ofer sealt waeter (_the sea_), 1990.

searo (G. sarwa, pl.), st. n.: 1) _armor, accoutrements, war-gear_: nom.
pl. sae-manna searo, 329; dat. pl. secg on searwum (_a man, warrior, in
panoply_), 249, 2701; in (on) searwum, 323, 1558; 2531, 2569; instr. pl.
searwum, 1814.--2) _insidiae, ambuscade, waylaying, deception, battle_: þa
ic of searwum cwom, fah from feondum, 419.--3) _cunning, art, skill_:
instr. pl. sadol searwum fah (_saddle cunningly ornamented_), 1039;
earmbeaga fela, searwum ge-saeled (_many cunningly-linked armlets_),
2765.--Comp. fyrd-, gueth-, inwit-searo.

searo-bend, st. f., _band, bond, of curious workmanship_: instr. pl.
searo-bendum faest, 2087.

searo-fah, adj., _cunningly inlaid, ornamented, with gold_: nom. sg.
here-byrne hondum ge-broden, sid and searo-fah, 1445.

searo-ge-þraec, st. n., _heap of treasure-objects_: acc. sg., 3103.

searo-gim, st. m., _cunningly set gem, rich jewel_: acc. pl. searo-gimmas,
2750; gen. pl. searo-gimma, 1158.

searo-grim, adj., _cunning and fierce_: nom. sg., 595.

searo-haebbend, pres. part. as subst., _arms-bearing, warrior with his
trappings_: gen. pl. searo-haebbendra, 237.

searo-net, st. n., _armor-net, shirt of mail, corselet_: nom. sg., 406.

searo-nieth, st. m.: 1) _cunning hostility, plot, wiles_: acc. pl.
searo-niethas, 1201, 2739.--2) also, only _hostility, feud, contest_: acc.
pl. searo-niethas, 3068; gen. pl. searo-nietha, 582.

searo-þanc, st. m., _ingenuity_: instr. pl. searo-þoncum, 776.

searo-wundor, st. n., _rare wonder_: acc. sg., 921.

seax, st. n., _shortsword, hip-knife; dagger_: instr. sg. seaxe,
1546.--Comp. wael-seax.

seax-ben, st. f., _dagger-wound_: instr. pl. siex-bennum, 2905.

seofon, num., _seven_, 517; seofan, 2196; decl. acc. syfone, 3123.

seomian, w. v.: 1) intrans., _to be tied; lie at rest_: inf. siomian, 2768;
pret. sg. seomode, 302.--2) w. acc., _to put in bonds, entrap, catch_:
pret. sg. duguethe and geogoethe seomade (cf. 2086-2092), 161.

seonu, st. f., _sinew_: nom. pl. seonowe, 818.

seoc, adj., _feeble, weak; fatally ill_: nom. sg. feorh-bennum seoc (of
Beowulf, _sick unto death_), 2741; siex-bennum seoc (of the dead dragon),
2905; nom. pl. modes seoce (_sick of soul_), 1604.--Comp.: ellen-, feorh-,
heaetho-seoc.

seoethan, st. v. w. acc., _to seethe, boil_; figuratively, _be excited over,
brood_: pret. sg. ic þaes mod-ceare sorh-wylmum seaeth (_I pined in
heart-grief for that_), 1994; so, 190.

seoloeth, st. m.?, _bight, bay_ (cf. Dietrich in Haupt XI. 416): gen. pl.
sioleetha bi-gong (_the realm of bights_ = the [surface of the] sea?), 2368.

seon, syn, st. f., _aspect, sight_: in comp. wlite-, wundor-seon, an-syn.

seon, st. v., _to see_: a) w. acc.: inf. searo-wunder seon, 921; so, 387,
1181, 1276, 3103; þaer maeg nihta ge-hwaem nieth-wundor seon (_there may every
night be seen a repulsive marvel_), 1366; pret. sg. ne seah ic ...
heal-sittendra medudream maran, 2015.--b) w. acc. and predicate adj.: ne
seah ic elþeodige þus manige men modiglicran, 336.--c) w. prep. or adv.:
pret. sg. seah on enta ge-weorc, 2718; seah on un-leofe, 2864; pl. folc to
saegon (_looked on_), 1423.

ge-seon, _to see, behold_: a) w. acc.: pres. sg. III. se þe beah ge-syheth,
2042; inf. ge-seon, 396, 571, 649, 962, 1079, etc.; pret. sg. geseah, 247,
927, 1558, 1614; pl. ge-sawon, 1606, 2253.--b) w. acc. and predicate adj.,
pres. sg. III. ge-syheth ... on his suna bure win-sele westne (_sees in his
son's house the wine-hall empty_; or, _hall of friends_?), 2456.--c) w.
inf.: pret. sg. ge-seah ... beran ofer bolcan beorhte randas (_saw shining
shields borne over the gang-plank_), 229; pret. pl. maere maethethum-sweord
monige ge-sawon beforan beorn beran, 1024.--d) w. acc. and inf.: pret. sg.
ge-seah, 729, 1517, 1586, 1663, 2543, 2605, etc.; pl. ge-sawon, 221, 1348,
1426; ge-segan, 3039; ge-segon, 3129.--e) w. depend, clause: inf. maeg þonne
... geseon sunu Hreethles, þaet ic (_may the son of H. see that I..._), 1486;
pret. pl. ge-sawon, 1592.

geond-seon, _to see, look through, over_, w. acc.: pret. sg. (ic) þaet eall
geond-seh, 3088.

ofer-seon, _to see clearly, plainly_: pret. pl. ofer-sawon, 419.

on-seon, _to look on, at_, w. acc.: pret. pl. on-sawon, 1651.

seowian, w. v., _to sew, put together, link_: pret. part. searo-net seowed
smiethes or-þancum (_the corselet woven by the smith's craft_), 406.

sib, st. f., _peace, friendship, relationship_: nom. sg., 1165, 1858; sibb,
2601; acc. sibbe, 950, 2432, 2923; instr. sg. sibbe (_in peace_?),
154.--Comp.: dryht-, frietho-sib.

sib-aeetheling, st. m., _nobilis consanguineus, kindred prince_ or _nobleman_:
nom. pl. -aeethelingas, 2709.

sibbe-gedryht, st. f., _body of allied_ or _related warriors_: acc. sg.
sibbe-gedriht (the Danes), 387; (the Geatas), 730.

siethethan, syethethan: 1) adv.: a) _since, after, from now on, further_, 142, 149,
283, 567, 1903, 2052, 2065, 2176, 2703, 2807, 2921; seoethethan, 1876.--b)
_then, thereupon, after_, 470, 686, 1454, 1557, 1690, 2208; seoethethan, 1938;
aer ne siethethan (_neither before nor after_), 719.

2) Conj.: a) w. ind. pres., _as soon as, when_, 413, 605, 1785, 2889,
2912.--b) w. ind. pret., _when, whilst_, 835, 851, 1205, 1207, 1421, 1590,
2357, 2961, 2971, 3128; seoethethan, 1776;--_since_, 649, 657, 983, 1199, 1254,
1309, 2202;--_after_, either with pluperf.: siethethan him scyppend forscrifen
haefde (_after the Creator had proscribed him_), 106; so, 1473; or with
pret. = pluperf.: syethethan niht becom (_after night had come on_), 115; so,
6, 132, 723, 887, 902, 1078, 1149, 1236, 1262, 1282, 1979, 2013, 2125; or
pret. and pluperf. together, 2104-2105.

siex. See seax.

sige-dryhten, st. m., _lord of victory, victorious lord_: nom. sg.
sige-drihten, 391.

sige-eadig, adj., _blest with victory, victorious_: acc. sg. neut.
sige-eadig bil, 1558.

sige-folc, st. n., _victorious people, troop_: gen. pl. sige-folca, 645.

sige-hreeth, st. f., _confidence of victory_(?): acc. sg., 490. See Note.

sige-hreethig, adj., _victorious_: nom. sg., 94, 1598, 2757.

sige-hwil, st. f., _hour_ or _day of victory_: gen. sg. sige-hwile, 2711.

sige-leas, adj., _devoid of victory, defeated_: acc. sg. sige-leasne sang,
788.

sige-rof, adj., _victorious_: nom. sg., 620.

sige-þeod, st. f., _victorious warrior troop_: dat. sg. on sige-þeode,
2205.

sige-waepen, st. n., _victor-weapon, sword_: dat. pl. sige-waepnum, 805.

sigl, st. n.: 1) _sun_: nom. sg. sigel, 1967.--2) _sun-shaped ornament_:
acc. pl. siglu, 3165; sigle (bracteates of a necklace), 1201; gen. pl.
sigla, 1158.--Comp. maethethum-sigl.

sigor, st. m., _victory_: gen. sg. sigores, 1022; gen. pl. sigora, 2876,
3056.--Comp.: hreeth-, wig-sigor.

sigor-eadig, adj., _victorious_: nom. sg. sigor-eadig secg (of Beowulf),
1312, 2353.

sin. See syn.

sinc, st. n., _treasure, jewel, property_: nom. sg., 2765; acc. sg. sinc,
81, 1205, 1486, 2384, 2432; instr. sg. since, 1039, 1451, 1616, 1883, 2218,
2747; gen. sg. sinces, 608, 1171, 1923, 2072; gen. pl. sinca, 2429.

sinc-fah, adj., _treasure-decked_: acc. sg. neut. weak form, sinc-fage sel,
167.

sinc-faet, st. n., _costly vessel_: acc. sg., 2232, 2301;--_a costly
object_: acc. sg., 1201 (i.e. mene); acc. pl. sinc-fato, 623.

sinc-ge-streon, st. n., _precious treasure, jewel of value _: instr. pl.
-gestreonum, 1093; gen. pl. -gestreona, 1227.

sinc-gifa, w. m., _jewel-giver, treasure-giver = prince, ruler_: acc. sg.
sinc-gyfan, 1013; dat. sg. sinc-gifan (of Beowulf), 2312; (of Aeschere),
1343.

sinc-maethethum, st. m., _treasure_: nom. sg., 2194.

sinc-þego, f., _acceptance, taking, of jewels_: nom. sg., 2885.

sin-dolh, st. n., _perpetual_, i.e. incurable, _wound_: nom. sg. syn-dolh,
818.

sin-frea, w. m., _wedded lord, husband_: nom. sg., 1935.

sin-gal, adj., _continual, lasting_: acc. sg. fem, sin-gale saece, 154.

sin-gales, adv. gen. sg., _continually, ever_, 1778; syngales, 1136.

singala, adv. gen. pl., the same, 190.

singan, st. v., _to sound, ring, sing_: pret. sg. hring-iren scir song in
searwum (_the ringed iron rang in the armor_), 323; horn stundum song
fus-lic f[yrd]-leoeth (_at times the horn rang forth a ready battle-song_),
1424; scop hwilum sang (_the singer sang at whiles_), 496.

a-singan, _to sing out, sing to an end_: pret. part. leoeth waes a-sungen,
1160.

sin-here, st. m., (_army without end_?), _strong army, host_: instr. sg.
sin-herge, 2937.

sin-niht, st. f., _perpetual night, night after night_: acc. pl. sin-nihte
(_night after night_), 161.

sin-sceaetha, w. m., _irreconcilable foe_: nom. sg. syn-scaetha, 708; acc. sg.
syn-scaethan, 802.

sin-snaed, st. f., (_continuous biting_) _bite after bite_: dat. pl.
syn-snaedum swealh (_swallowed bite after bite, in great bites_), 744.

sittan, st. v.: 1) _to sit_: pres. sg. Wiglaf siteeth ofer Biowulfe, 2907;
imper. sg. site nu to symle, 489; inf. þaer swieth-ferhethe sittan eodon
(_whither the strong-minded went and sat_), 493; eode ... to hire frean
sittan (_went to sit by her lord_), 642; pret. sg. on wicge saet (_sat on
the horse_), 286; aet fotum saet (_sat at the feet_), 500, 1167; þaer Hroethgar
saet (_where H. sat_), 356; so, 1191, 2895; he gewergad saet ... frean eaxlum
neah, 2854; pret. pl. saeton, 1165; gistas setan (MS. secan) ... and on mere
staredon (_the strangers sat and stared on the sea_), 1603.--2) _to be in a
certain state_ or _condition_ (_quasi_ copula): pret. sg. maere þeoden ...
unbliethe saet, 130.--Comp.: flet-, heal-sittend.

be-sittan, obsidere, _to surround, besiege_, w. acc.: besaet þa sin-herge
sweorda lafe wundum werge (_then besieged he with a host the leavings of
the sword, wound-weary_), 2937.

for-sittan, obstrui, _to pass away, fail_: pres. sg. eagena bearhtm
for-siteeth (_the light of the eyes passeth away_), 1768.

ge-sittan: 1) _to sit, sit together_: pret. sg. monig-oft ge-saet rice to
rune (_very often sat the king deliberating with his council_ (see rice),
171; wieth earm ge-saet (_supported himself upon his arm, sat on his arm_?),
750; feetha eal ge-saet (_the whole troop sat down_), 1425; ge-saet þa wieth
sylfne (_sat there beside, near to, him_, i.e. Hygelac), 1978;

ge-saet þa on naesse, 2418; so, 2718; pret. part. (syethethan) ... we to symble
ge-seten haefdon, 2105.--2) w. acc., _to seat one's self upon_ or _in
something, to board_: pret. sg. þa ic ... sae-bat ge-saet, 634.

of-sittan, w. acc., _to sit over_ or _upon_: pret. sg. of-saet þa þone
sele-gyst, 1546.

ofer-sittan, w. acc., _to dispense with, refrain from_ (cf. ofer, 2 [c]):
pres. sg. I. þaet ic wieth þone gueth-flogan gylp ofer-sitte, 2529; inf. secge
ofer-sittan, 685.

on-sittan (O.H.G. int-sizzan, _to start from one's seat, to be startled_),
w. acc., _to fear_: inf. þa faehethe, atole ecg-þraece eower leode siwethe
onsittan _to dread the hostility, the fierce contest, of your people_, 598.

ymb-sittan, _to sit around_, w. acc.: pret. pl. (þaet hie) ... symbel
ymb-saeton (_sat round the feast_), 564. See ymb-sittend.

sid, adj.: 1) _wide, broad, spacious, large_: nom. sg. (here-byrne, glof)
sid, 1445, 2087; acc. sg. m. sidne scyld, 437; on sidne sae, 507; fem.
byrnan side (of a corselet extending over the legs), 1292; ofer sae side,
2395; neut. side rice, 1734, 2200; instr. sg. sidan herge, 2348; acc. pl.
side sae-naessas, 223; side scyldas, 325; gen. pl. sidra sorga (_of great
sorrows_), 149.--2) in moral sense, _great, noble_: acc. sg. þurh sidne
sefan, 1727.

side, adv., _far and wide, afar_, 1224.

sid-faeethme, adj., _broad-bosomed_: acc. sg. sid-faeethme scip, 1918.

sid-faeethmed, _quasi_ pret. part., the same: nom. sg. sid-faeethmed scip, 302.

sid-rand, st. m., _broad shield_: nom. sg., 1290.

sieth (G. seþu-s), adj., _late_: superl. nom. sg. siethast sige-hwile (_the
last hour, day, of victory_), 2711; dat. sg. aet siethestan (_in the end, at
last_), 3014.

sieth, adv. compar., _later_: aer and sieth (_sooner and later, early and
late_), 2501.

sieth (G. sinþ-s), st. m.: l) _road, way, journey, expedition_; esp., _road
to battle_: nom. sg., 501, 3059, 3090; naes þaet eethe sieth (_that was no easy
road, task_), 2587; so, þaet waes geocor sieth, 766; acc. sg. sieth, 353, 512,
909, 1279, 1430, 1967; instr. dat. siethe, 532, 1952, 1994; gen. sg. siethes,
579, 1476, 1795, 1909. Also, _return_: nom. sg., 1972.--2) _undertaking,
enterprise_; esp., _battle-work_: nom. sg. nis þaet eower sieth, 2533; ne bieth
swylc earges sieth (_such is no coward's enterprise_), 2542; acc. sg. sieth,
873. In pl.= _adventures_: nom. siethas, 1987; acc. siethas, 878; gen. sietha,
318.--3) time (as iterative): nom. sg. naes þaet forma sieth (_that was not the
first time_), 717, 1464; so, 1528, 2626; acc. sg. oftor micle þonne on aenne
sieth, 1580; instr. sg. (forman, oethre, þriddan) siethe, 741, 1204, 2050, 2287,
2512, 2518, 2671, 2689, 3102.--Comp.: cear-, eft-, ellor-, gryre-, sae-,
wil-, wraec-sieth.

ge-sieth, st. m., _comrade, follower_: gen. sg. ge-siethes, 1298; nom. pl.
ge-siethas, 29; acc. pl. ge-siethas, 2041, 2519; dat. pl. ge-siethum, 1314, 1925,
2633; gen. pl. ge-sietha, 1935.--Comp.: eald-, wil-gesieth.

sieth-faet, st. m., _way, journey_: acc. sg. þone sieth-faet, 202; dat. sg.
sieth-fate, 2640.

sieth-fram, -from, adj., _ready for the journey_: nom. pl. sieth-frome, 1814.

siethian, w. v., _to journey, march_: inf., 721, 809; pret. sg. siethode, 2120.

for-siethian, _iter fatale inire_ (Grein): pret. sg. haefde þa for-siethod sunu
Ecg-þeowes under gynne grund _(would have found his death_, etc.), 1551.

sie, sy. See wesan.

sigan, st. v., _to descend, sink, incline_: pret. pl. sigon aet-somne
(_descended together_), 307; sigon þa to slaepe _(they sank to sleep_),
1252.

ge-sigan, _to sink, fall_: inf. ge-sigan aet saecce (_fall in battle_), 2660.

sin, poss. pron., _his_: acc. sg. m. sinne, 1961, 1985, 2284, 2790; dat.
sg. sinum, 1508.

slaep, st. m., _sleep_: nom. sg., 1743; dat. sg. to slaepe, 1252.

slaepan, st. v., _to sleep_: pres. part. nom. sg. slaepende, 2220; acc. sg.
he gefeng ... slaependne rinc (_seized a sleeping warrior]_, 742; acc. pl.
slaepende fraet folces Denigea fiftyne men _(devoured, sleeping, fifteen of
the people of the Danes_), 1582.

sleac, adj., _slack, lazy_: nom. sg., 2188.

sleahan, slean: 1) _to strike, strike at_: a) intrans.: pres. subj. sg. þaet
he me ongean slea (_that he should strike at me_), 682; pret. sg. yrringa
sloh (_struck angrily_), 1566; so, sloh hilde-bille, 2680. b) trans.: pret.
sg. þaet he þone nieth-gaest nioethor hwene sloh _(that he struck the dragon
somewhat lower_, etc.), 2700.--2) w. acc.: _to slay, kill_: pret. sg. þaes
þe he Abel slog (_because he slew A._), 108; so, slog, 421, 2180; sloh,
1582, 2356; pl. slogon, 2051; pret. part. þa waes Fin slaegen, 1153.

ge-slean, w. acc.: 1) _to fight a battle_: pret. sg. ge-sloh þin faeder
faehethe maeste, 459.--2) _to gain by fighting_: syethethan hie þa maeretha ge-slogon,
2997.

of-slean, _to ofslay, kill_, w. acc.: pret. sg. of-sloh, 574, 1666, 3061.

sliethe (G. sleiþ-s), adj., _savage, fierce, dangerous_: acc. sg. þurh sliethne
nieth, 184; gen. pl. sliethra ge-slyhta, 2399.

sliethen, adj., _furious, savage, deadly_ nom. sg. sweord-bealo sliethen, 1148.

slitan, st. v., _to slit, tear to pieces_, w. acc.: pret. sg. slat
(slaependne rinc), 742.

slyht, st. m., _blow_: in comp. and-slyht.

ge-slyht, st. n. (collective), _battle, conflict_: gen. pl. sliethra
ge-slyhta, 2399.

smieth, st. m., _smith, armorer_: nom. sg. waepna smieth, 1453; gen. sg. smiethes,
406.--Comp. wundor-smieth.

be-smiethian, w. v., _to surround with iron-work, bands_, etc.: pret. part.
he (the hall Heorot) þaes faeste waes innan and utan iren-bendum searo-þoncum
besmiethod (i.e. the beams out of which the hall was built were held together
skilfully, within and without, by iron clamps), 776.

snell, adj., _fresh, vigorous, lively; of martial temper_: nom. sg. se
snella, 2972.

snellic, adj., the same: nom. sg., 691.

snotor, snottor, adj., _clever, wise, intelligent_: nom. sg. snotor, 190,
827, 909, 1385; in weak form, (se) snottra, 1314, 1476, 1787; snotra, 2157,
3121; nom. pl. snotere, 202, 416; snottre, 1592.--Comp. fore-snotor.

snotor-lice, adv., _intelligently, wisely_: compar. snotor-licor, 1483.

snude, adv., _hastily, quickly, soon_, 905, 1870, 1972, 2326, 2569, 2753.

be-snyethian, w. v., _to rob, deprive of_: pret. sg. þaette Ongenþio ealdre
be-snyethede Haeethcyn, 2925.

snyrian, w. v., _to hasten, hurry_: pret. pl. snyredon aet-somne (_hurried
forward together_), 402.

snyttru, f., _intelligence, wisdom_: acc. sg. snyttru, 1727; dat. pl. mid
modes snyttrum, 1707; þe we ealle aer ne meahton snyttrum be-syrwan (_a deed
which all of us together could not accomplish before with all our wisdom_),
943. Adv., _wisely_, 873.

somne. See samne.

sorgian, w. v.: 1) _to be grieved, sorrow_: imper. sg. II. ne sorga!
1385.--2) _to care for, trouble one's self about_: inf. no þu ymb mines ne
þearft lices feorme leng sorgian (_thou needst not care longer about my
life's [body's] sustenance_), 451.

sorh, st. f., _grief, pain, sorrow_: nom. sg., 1323; sorh is me to secganne
(_pains me to say_), 473; acc. sg. sorge, 119, 2464; dat. instr. sg. mid
þaere sorge, 2469; sorge (_in sorrow, grieved_), 1150; gen. sg. worna fela
... sorge, 2005; dat. pl. sorgum, 2601; gen. pl. sorga, 149.--Comp.: hyge-,
inwit-, þegn-sorh.

sorh-cearig, adj., _curis sollicitus, heart-broken_: nom. sg., 2456.

sorh-ful, adj., _sorrowful, troublesome, difficult_: nom. sg., 2120; acc.
sg. sorh-fullne (sorh-fulne) sieth, 512, 1279, 1430.

sorh-leas, adj., _free from sorrow_ or _grief_: nom. sg., 1673.

sorh-leoeth, st. n., _dirge, song of sorrow_: acc. sg., 2461.

sorh-wylm, st. m., _wave of sorrow_ nom. pl. sorh-wylmas, 905.

socn, st. f., _persecution, hostile pursuit_ or _attack_ (see secan): dat,
(instr.) þaere socne (by reason of Grendel's persecution), 1778.

soeth, st. n., _sooth, truth_:: acc. sg. soeth, 532, 701, 1050, 1701, 2865;
dat. sg. to soethe (_in truth_), 51, 591, 2326.

soeth, adj., _true, genuine_: nom. sg, þaet is soeth metod, 1612; acc. sg. n.
gyd awraec soeth and sar-lic, 2110.

soethe, adv., _truly, correctly, accurately_, 524; soethe gebunden (of
alliterative verse: _accurately put together_), 872.

soeth-cyning, st. m., _true king_: nom. sg. sigora soeth-cyning (_God_), 3056.

soeth-faest, adj., _soothfast, established in truth, orthodox_ (here used of
the Christian martyrs): gen. pl. soeth-faestra dom (_glory, realm, of the
saints_), 2821.

soeth-lice, adv., _in truth, truly, truthfully_, 141, 273, 2900.

softe, adv., _gently, softly_: compar. þy seft (_the more easily_),
2750.--Comp. un-softe.

sona, adv., _soon, immediately_, 121, 722, 744, 751, 1281, 1498, 1592,
1619, 1763, etc.

on-spannan, st. v., _to un-span, unloose_: pret. sg. his helm on-speon
(_loosed his helm_), 2724.

spel, st. n., _narrative, speech_: acc. sg. spell, 2110; acc. pl. spel,
874; gen. pl. spella, 2899, 3030.--Comp. wea-spel.

sped, st. f.: 1) _luck, success_: in comp. here-, wig-sped.--2) _skill,
facility_: acc. sg. on sped (_skilfully_), 874.

spiwan, st. v., _to spit, spew_, w. instr.: inf. gledum spiwan (_spit
fire_), 2313

spor, st. n., _spur_: in comp. hand-spor.

spowan, st. v., _to speed well, help, avail_: pret. sg. him wiht ne speow
(_availed him naught_), 2855; hu him aet aete speow (_how he sped in the
eating_), 3027.

spraec, st. f., _speech, language_: instr. sg. frecnan spraece (_through
bold, challenging, discourse_), 1105.--Comp.: aefen-, gylp-spraec.

sprecan, st. v., _to speak_: inf. ic sceal foreth sprecan gen ymbe Grendel
_(I shall go on speaking about G._), 2070; w. acc. se þe wyle soeth sprecan
(_he who will speak the truth_), 2865; imper. to Geatum sprec (spraec, MS.),
1172; pret. sg. III. spraec, 1169, 1699, 2511, 2725; word aefter spraec, 341;
no ymbe þa faehethe spraec, 2619; II. hwaet þu worn fela ... ymb Brecan spraece
(_how much thou hast spoken of Breca!_), 531; pl. hwaet wit geo spraecon
(_what we two spoke of before_), 1477; gomele ymb godne on-geador spraecon,
þaet big ... _(the graybeards spoke together about the valiant one, that
they ..._), 1596; swa wit furethum spraecon (_as we two spoke, engaged,
before_), 1708; pret. part. þa waes ... þryeth-word sprecen, 644.

ge-sprecan, w. acc., _to speak_: pret. sg. ge-spraec, 676, 1399, 1467, 3095.

spreot, st. m., _pole; spear, pike_: in comp. eofor-spreot.

springan, st. v., _to jump, leap; flash_: pret. sg. hra wide sprong _(the
body bounded far_), 1589; swat aedrum sprong foreth under fexe (_the blood
burst out in streams from under his hair_), 2967; pl. wide sprungon
hilde-leoman (_flashed afar_), 2583. Also figuratively: blaed wide sprang
(_his repute spread afar_), 18.

ge-springan, _to spring forth_: pret. sg. swa þaet blod ge-sprang (_as the
blood burst forth_), 1668. Figuratively, _to arise, originate_: pret. sg.
Sigemunde gesprong aefter deaeth-daege dom un-lytel, 885.

on-springan, _to burst in two, spring asunder_: pret. pl. seonowe
onsprungon, burston banlocan 818.

standan, st. v.: 1) absolutely or with prep., _to stand_: pres. III. pl.
eored-geatwe þe ge þaer on standaeth (_the warlike accoutrements wherein ye
there stand_), 2867; inf. ge-seah ... orcas stondan (_saw vessels
standing_), 2761; pret. sg. aet hyethe stod hringed-stefna (_in the harbor
stood the curved-prowed?, metal-covered?, ship_), 32; stod on stapole
(_stood near the [middle] column_), 927; so, 1914, 2546; þaet him on aldre
stod here-strael hearda (_that the sharp war-arrow stood in his vitals_),
1435; so, 2680; pl. garas stodon ... samod aet-gaedere (_the spears stood
together_), 328; him big stodan bunan and orcas (_by him stood cans and
pots_), 3048. Also of still water: pres. sg. III. nis þaet feor heonon ...
þaet se mere standeeth, 1363.--2) with predicate adj., _to stand, continue in
a certain state_: subj. pres. þaet þes sele stande ... rinca ge-hwylcum idel
and unnyt (_that this hall stands empty and useless for every warrior_),
411; inf. hord-wynne fand eald uht-sceaetha opene standan, 2272; pret. sg. oeth
þaet idel stod husa selest, 145; so, 936; waeter under stod dreorig and
ge-drefed, 1418--3) _to belong_ or _attach to; issue_: pret. sg. Noreth-Denum
stod atelic egesa (_great terror clung to, overcame, the North Danes_),
784; þara anum stod sadol searwum fah (_on one of the steeds lay an
ingeniously-inlaid saddle_), 1038; byrne-leoma eldum on andan (_burning
light stood forth, a horror to men_), 2314; leoht inne stod (_a light stood
in it_, i.e. the sword), 1571; him of eagum stod ... leoht unfaeger (_an
uncanny light issued from his eyes_), 727; so, þaet [fram] þam gyste
[gryre-] broga stod, 2229.

a-standan, _to stand up, arise_: pret. sg. a-stod, 760, 1557, 2093.

aet-standan, _to stand at, near_, or _in_: pret. sg. þaet hit (i.e. þaet
swurd) on wealle aet-stod, 892.

for-standan, _to stand against_ or _before_, hence: 1) _to hinder,
prevent_: pret. sg. (breost-net) wieth ord and wieth ecge in-gang for-stod
(_the shirt of mail prevented point or edge from entering_), 1550; subj.
nefne him witig god wyrd for-stode (_if the wise God had not warded off
such a fate from them_, i.e. the men threatened by Grendel), 1057.--2)
_defend_, w. dat. of person against whom: inf. þaet he ... mihte
heaetho-liethendum hord for-standan, bearn and bryde (_that he might protect
his treasure, his children, and his spouse from the sea-farers_), 2956.

ge-standan, intrans., _to stand_: pret. sg. ge-stod, 358, 404, 2567; pl.
nealles him on heape hand-gesteallan ... ymbe gestodon (_not at all did his
boon-companions stand serried around him_), 2597.

stapa, w. m., _stepper, strider_: in comp. haeeth-, mearc-stapa.

stapan, st. v., _to step, stride, go forward_: pret. sg. eorl furethur stop,
762; gum-feetha stop lind-haebbendra (_the troop of shield-warriors strode
on_), 1402.

aet-stapan, _to stride up_ or _to_: pret. sg. foreth near aet-stop (_strode up
nearer_), 746.

ge-stapan, _to walk, stride_: pret. sg. he to foreth gestop dyrnan craefte,
dracan heafde neah (_he_, i.e. the man that robbed the dragon of the
vessel, _had through hidden craft come too near the dragon's head_), 2290.

stapol, st. m., (=[Greek: basis]), _trunk of a tree_; hence, _support,
pillar, column_: dat. sg. stod on stapole (_stood by_ or _near the wooden
middle column of Heorot_), 927; instr. pl. þa stan-bogan stapulum faeste
(_the arches of stone upheld by pillars_), 2719. See Note.

starian, w. v., _to stare, look intently at_: pres. sg. I. þaet ic on þone
hafelan ... eagum starige (_that I see the head with my eyes_), 1782; þara
fraetwa ... þe ic her on starie (_for the treasures ... that I here look
upon_), 2797; III. þonne he on þaet sine staraeth, 1486; sg. for pl. þara þe
on swylc staraeth, 997; pret. sg. þaet (sin-frea) hire an daeges eagum starede,
1936; pl. on mere staredon, 1604.

stan, st. m., 1) _stone_: in comp. eorclan-stan.--2) _rock_: acc. sg. under
(ofer) harne stan, 888, 1416, 2554, 2745; dat. sg. stane, 2289, 2558.

stan-beorh, st. m., _rocky elevation, stony mountain_: acc. sg. stan-beorh
steapne, 2214.

stan-boga, w. m., _stone arch, arch hewn out of the rock_: dat. sg.
stan-bogan, 2546; nom. pl. stan-bogan, 2719.

stan-clif, st. n., _rocky cliff_: acc. pl. stan-cleofu, 2541.

stan-fah, adj., _stone-laid, paved with stones of different colors_: nom.
sg. straet waes stan-fah (_the street was of different colored stones_), 320.

stan-hlieth, st. n., _rocky slope_: acc. pl. stan-hlietho, 1410.

staef, st. m.: 1) _staff_: in comp. run-staf.--2) _elementum_: in comp. ar-,
ende-, facen-staef.

stael, st. m., _place, stead_: dat. sg. þaet þu me a waere foreth-gewitenum on
faeder staele (_that thou, if I died, wouldst represent a father's place to
me_), 1480.

staelan, w. v., _to place; allure_ or _instigate_: inf. þa ic on morgne
ge-fraegn maeg oetherne billes ecgum on bonan staelan _(then I learned that on
the morrow one brother instigated the other to murder with the sword's
edge_; or, _one avenged the other on the murderer_?, cf. 2962 seqq.), 2486.

ge-staelan, _to place, impose, institute_: pret. part. ge feor hafaeth faehethe
ge-staeled (_Grendel's mother has further begun hostilities against us_),
1341.

stede, st. m., _place, -stead_: in comp. bael-, burh-, folc-, heah-, meethel-,
wang-, wic-stede.

stefn, st. f., _voice_: nom. sg., 2553; instr. sg. niwan (niowan) stefne
(properly nova voce) = denuo, _anew, again_, 2595, 1790.

stefn, st. m., _prow of a ship_: acc. sg., 213; see bunden-, hringed-,
wunden-stefna.

on-stellan, w. v., _constituere, to cause, bring about_: pret. sg. se þaes
or-leges or on-stealde, 2408.

steng, st. m., _pole, pike_: in comp wael-steng.

ge-steppan, w. v., _to stride, go_: pret. sg. folce ge-stepte ofer sae side
sunu Ohtheres (_O.'s son_, i.e. Eadgils, _went with warriors over the broad
sea_), 2394.

stede (O.H.G. stati, M.H.G. staete), adj., _firm, steady_: nom. sg. waes
stede naegla ge-hwylc style ge-licost (_each nail-place was firm as steel_),
986.

stepan, w. v. w. acc., _to exalt, honor_: pret. sg. þeah þe hine mihtig god
... eafeethum stepte, 1718.

ge-steald, st. n., _possessions, property_: in comp. in-gesteald, 1156.

ge-stealla, w. m., (contubernalis), _companion, comrade_: in comp. eaxl-,
fyrd-, hand-, lind-, nyd-ge-stealla.

stearc-heort, adj., (fortis animo), _stout-hearted, courageous_: nom. sg.
(of the dragon), 2289; (of Beowulf), 2553.

steap, adj., _steep, projecting, towering_: acc. sg. steapne hrof, 927;
stan-beorh steapne, 2214; wieth steapne rond, 2567; acc. pl. m. beorgas
steape, 222; neut. steap stan-hlietho, 1410.--Comp. heaetho-steap.

stille, adj., _still, quiet_: nom. sg. wid-floga wundum stille, 2831.

stille, adv., _quietly_, 301.

stincan, st. v., _to smell; snuff_: pret. sg. stonc þa aefter stane
(_snuffed along the stone_), 2289.

stieth, adj., _hard, stiff_: nom. sg. wunden-mael (swurd) ... stieth and
stylecg, 1534.

stieth-mod, adj., _stout-hearted, unflinching_: nom. sg., 2567.

stig, st. m., _way, path_: nom. sg., 320, 2214; acc. pl. stige nearwe,
1410--Comp. medu-stig.

stigan, st. v., _to go, ascend_: pret. sg. þa he to holme [st]ag (_when he
plunged forward into the sea_), 2363; pl. beornas ... on stefn stigon, 212;
Wedera leode on wang stigon, 225; subj. pret. aer he on bed stige, 677.

a-stigan, _to ascend_: pres. sg. þonon yeth-geblond up a-stigeeth won to
wolcnum, 1374; gueth-rinc a-stah (_the fierce hero ascended_, i.e. was laid
on the pyre? or, _the fierce smoke_ [rec] _ascended?_), 1119; gamen eft
a-stah (_joy again went up, resounded_), 1161; wudu-rec a-stah sweart of
swioethole, 3145; sweg up a-stag, 783.

ge-stigan, _to ascend, go up_: pret. sg. þa ic on holm ge-stah, 633.

storm, st. m., _storm_: nom. sg. straela storm (_storm of missiles_), 3118;
instr. sg. holm storme weol (_the sea billowed stormily_), 1132.

stol, st. m., _chair, throne, seat_: in comp. brego-, eethel-, gif-,
gum-stol.

stow, st. f., _place, -stow_: nom. sg. nis þaet heoru stow (_a haunted
spot_), 1373; acc. sg. frecne stowe, 1379; grund-buendra gearwe stowe _(the
place prepared for men_, i.e. death-bed; see gesacan and ge-nydan), 1007:
comp. wael-stow.

strang, strong, adj., _strong; valiant; mighty_: nom. sg. waes þaet ge-win to
strang (_that sorrow was too great_), 133; þu eart maegenes strang (_strong
of body_), 1845; waes sio hond to strong (_the hand was too powerful_),
2685; superl. wigena strengest (_strongest of warriors_), 1544; maegenes
strengest (_strongest in might_), 196; maegene strengest, 790.

stradan? (cf. straede = passus, gressus), _to tread_, (be)-_stride, stride
over_ (Grein): subj. pres. se þone wong strade, 3074. See Note.

strael, st. m., _arrow, missile_: instr. sg. biteran straele, 1747; gen. pl.
straela storm, 3118.

straet, st. f., _street, highway_: nom. sg., 320; acc. sg. straete, 1635;
fealwe straete, 917.--Comp.: lagu-, mere-straet.

strengel, st. m., (_endowed with strength_), _ruler, chief_: acc. sg.
wigena strengel, 3116.

strengo, st. f., _strength, power, violence_: acc. sg. maegenes strenge,
1271; dat. sg. strenge, 1534; strengo, 2541;--dat. pl. strengum =
_violently, powerfully_ [_loosed from the strings_?], 3118: in comp.
hilde-, maegen-, mere-strengo.

stregan (O.S. strowian), w. v., _to strew, spread_: pret. part, waes þaem
yldestan ... morethorbed stred (_the death-bed was spread for the eldest
one_), 2437.

stream, st. m., _stream, flood, sea_: acc. sg. stream, 2546; nom. pl.
streamas, 212; acc. pl. streamas, 1262: comp. brim-, eagor-, firgen-,
lagu-stream.

ge-streon (cf. streon = robur, vis), st. n., _property, possessions_;
hence, _valuables, treasure, jewels_: nom. pl. Heaetho-beardna ge-streon
(_the costly treasure of the Heathobeardas_, i.e. the accoutrements
belonging to the slain H.), 2038; acc. pl. aeethelinga, eorla ge-streon, 1921,
3168.--Comp.: aer-, eald-, eorl-, heah-, hord-, long-, maethm-, sinc-,
þeod-ge-streon.

strudan, st. v., _to plunder, carry off_: subj. pres. naes þa on hlytme hwa
þaet hord strude, 3127.

ge-strynan, w. v. w. acc., _to acquire, gain_: inf. þaes þe (_because_) ic
moste minum leodum ... swylc ge-strynan, 2799.

stund, st. f., _time, space of time, while_: adv. dat. pl. stundum (_at
times_), 1424.

styrian, w. v. w. acc.: 1) _to arrange, put in order, tell_: inf. secg eft
on-gan sieth Beowulfes snyttrum styrian (_the poet then began to tell B.'s
feat skilfully_, i.e. put in poetic form), 873.--2) _to rouse, stir up_:
pres. sg. III. þonne wind styreeth laeth ge-widru (_when the wind stirreth up
the loathly weather_), 1375.--3) _to move against, attack, disturb_: subj.
pres. þaet he ... hring-sele hondum styrede (_that he should attack the
ring-hall with his hands_), 2841.

styrman, w. v., _to rage, cry out_: pret. sg. styrmde, 2553.

style, st. n., _steel_: dat. sg. style, 986.

styl-ecg, adj., _steel-edged_: nom. sg., 1534.

be-styman, w. v., _to inundate, wet, flood_: pret. part. (waeron) eal
benc-þelu blode be-stymed, 486.

suhtor-ge-faederan (collective), w. m. pl., _uncle and nephew, father's
brother and brother's son_: nom. pl., 1165.

sum, pron.: 1) indef., _one, a, any, a certain_; neut. _something_: a)
without part. gen.: nom. sg. sum, 1252; hilde-rinc sum, 3125; neut. ne
sceal þaer dyrne sum wesan (_naught there shall be hidden_), 271; acc. sg.
m. sumne, 1433; instr. sg. sume worde (_by a word, expressly_), 2157; nom.
pl. sume, 400, 1114; acc. pl. sume, 2941. b) with part. gen.: nom. sg.
gumena sum (_one of men, a man_), 1500, 2302; mere-hraegla sum, 1906; þaet
waes wundra sum, 1608; acc. sg. gylp-worda sum, 676. c) with gen. of
cardinals or notions of multitude: nom. sg. fiftena sum (_one of fifteen,
with fourteen companions_), 207; so, eahta sum, 3124; feara sum (_one of
few, with a few_), 1413; acc. sg. manigra sumne (_one of many, with many_),
2092; manna cynnes sumne (_one of the men_), i.e. one of the watchmen in
Heorot), 714; feara sumne (_some few, one of few_; or, _one of the foes_?),
3062.--2) with part. gen. sum sometimes = _this, that, the
afore-mentioned_: nom. sg. eower sum (_a certain one, that one, of you_,
i.e. Beowulf), 248; gueth-beorna sum (_the afore-mentioned warrior_, i.e. who
had shown the way to Hroethgar's palace), 314; eorla sum (_the said knight_,
i.e. Beowulf), 1313; acc. sg. hord-aerna sum (_a certain hoard-hall_), 2280.

sund, st. m.: 1) _swimming_: acc. sg. ymb sund, 507; dat. sg. aet sunde (_in
swimming_), 517; on sunde (_a-swimming_), 1619; gen. sg. sundes, 1437.--2)
_sea, ocean, sound_: nom. sg., 223; acc. sg. sund, 213, 512, 539, 1427,
1445.

ge-sund, adj., _sound, healthy, unimpaired_: acc. sg. m. ge-sundne, 1629,
1999; nom. pl. ge-sunde, 2076; acc. pl. w. gen. faeder alwalda ... eowic
ge-healde sietha ge-sunde (_the almighty Father keep you safe and sound on
your journey!_), 318.--Comp. an-sund.

sund-ge-bland, st. n., (_the commingled sea_), _sea-surge, sea-wave_: acc.
sg., 1451.

sund-nyt, st. f., _swimming-power_ or _employment, swimming_: acc. sg.
sund-nytte dreah (_swam through the sea_), 2361.

sundur, sundor, adv., _asunder, in twain_: sundur gedaelan (_to separate,
sunder_), 2423.

sundor-nyt, st. f., _special service_ (service in a special case): acc. sg.
sundor-nytte, 668.

sund-wudu, st. m., (_sea-wood_), _ship_: nom. acc. sg. sund-wudu, 208,
1907.

sunne, w. f., _sun_: nom. sg., 607; gen. sg. sunnan, 94, 649.

sunu, st. m., _son_: nom. sg., 524, 591, 646, 981, 1090, 1486, etc.; acc.
sg. sunu, 268, 948, 1116, 1176, 1809, 2014, 2120; dat. sg. suna, 344, 1227,
2026, 2161, 2730; gen. sg. suna, 2456, 2613, (1279); nom. pl. suna, 2381.

sueth, adv., _south, southward_, 859.

suethan, adv., _from the south_, 607; sigel suethan fus (_the sun inclined from
the south_), 1967.

swaethrian, w. v., _to sink to rest, grow calm_: brimu swaethredon (_the waves
became calm_), 570. See sweethrian.

swaethu, st. f., _trace, track, pathway_: acc. sg. swaethe, 2099.--Comp.:
swat-, wald-swaethu.

swaethul, st. m.? n.?, _smoke, mist_ (Dietrich in Haupt V. 215): dat. sg. on
swaethule, 783. See sweoethol.

swancor, adj., _slender, trim_: acc. pl. þrio wicg swancor, 2176.

swan-rad, st. f., _swan-road, sea_: acc. sg. ofer swan-rade, 200.

and-swarian, w. v., _to answer_: pret. sg. him se yldesta and-swarode, 258;
so, 340.

swa: 1) demons, adv., _so, in such a manner, thus_: swa sceal man don,
1173, 1535; swa þa driht-guman dreamum lifdon, 99; þaet ge-aefndon swa (_that
we thus accomplished_), 538; þaer hie meahton (i.e. feorh ealgian), 798; so,
20, 144, 189, 559, 763, 1104, 1472, 1770, 2058, 2145, 2178, 2991; swa
manlice _(so like a man_), 1047; swa fela (_so many_), 164, 592; swa
deorlice daed (_so valiant a deed_), 585; hine swa godne (_him so good_),
347; on swa geongum feore (_in so youthful age_), 1844; ge-deeth him swa
ge-wealdene worolde daelas þaet ... (_makes parts of the world so subject to
him that_...), 1733. In comparisons = _ever, the_ (adv.): me þin mod-sefa
licaeth leng swa wel (_thy mind pleases me ever so well, the longer the
better_), 1855. As an asseverative = _so_: swa me Higelac sie ... modes
bliethe (_so be Higelac gracious-minded to me!_), 435; swa þeah
(_nevertheless, however_), 973, 1930, 2879; swa þeh, 2968; hwaeethre swa þeah
(_yet however_), 2443.--2): a) conj., _as, so as_: oeth þaet his byre mihte
eorlscipe efnan swa his aerfaeder (_until his son might do noble deeds, as
his old father did_), 2623; eft swa aer (_again as before_), 643;--with
indic.: swa he selfa baed (_as he himself requested_), 29; swa he oft dyde
(_as he often did_), 444; gaeeth a Wyrd swa hio sceal, 455; swa guman
gefrungon, 667; so, 273, 352, 401, 561, 1049, 1056, 1059, 1135, 1232, 1235,
1239, 1253, 1382, etc.;--with subj.: swa þin sefa hwette _(as pleases thy
mind_, i.e. any way thou pleasest), 490. b) _as, as then, how_, 1143; swa
hie a waeron ... nyd-gesteallan (_as they were ever comrades in need_), 882;
swa hit diope ... be-nemdon þeodnas maere (_as, [how?] the mighty princes
had deeply cursed it_), 3070; swa he manna waes wigend weorethfullost (_as he
of men the worthiest warrior was_), 3099. c) _just as, the moment when_:
swa þaet blod gesprang, 1668. d) _so that_: swa he ne mihte no (_so that he
might not..._), 1509; so, 2185, 2007.--3) = qui, quae, quod, German so:
worhte wlite-beorhtne wang swa waeter bebugeeth (_wrought the beauteous plain
which_ (acc.) _water surrounds_), 93.--4) swa ... swa = _so ... as_, 595,
687-8, 3170; efne swa ... swa (_even so ... as_), 1093-4, 1224, 1284; efne
swa hwylc maegetha swa (_such a woman as, whatsoever woman_), 944; efne swa
hwylcum manna swa (_even so to each man as_), 3058.

for-swafan, st. v., _to carry away, sweep off_: pret. sg. ealle Wyrd
for-sweof mine magas to metod-sceafte, 2815.

for-swapan, st. v., _to sweep off, force_: pret. sg. hie Wyrd forsweop on
Grendles gryre, 477.

swat, st. m., (_sweat_), _wound-blood_: nom. sg., 2694, 2967; instr. sg.
swate, 1287.--Comp. heaetho-, hilde-swat.

swat-fah, adj., _blood-stained_: nom. sg., 1112.

swatig, adj., _gory_: nom. sg., 1570.

swat-swaethu, st. f., _blood-trace_: nom. sg., 2947.

be-swaelan, w. v., _to scorch_: pret. part. waes se leg-draca ... gledum
beswaeled, 3042.

swaes, adj., _intimate, special, dear_: acc. sg. swaesne eethel, 520; nom. pl.
swaese ge-siethas, 29; acc. pl. leode swaese, 1869; swaese ge-siethas, 2041; gen.
pl. swaesra ge-sietha, 1935.

swaes-lice, adv., _pleasantly, in a friendly manner_, 3090.

swebban, w. v., (_to put to sleep_), _to kill_: inf. ic hine sweorde
swebban nelle, 680; pres. sg. III. (absolutely) swefeeth, 601.

a-swebban, _to kill, slay_: pret. part. nom. pl. sweordum a-swefede, 567.

sweethrian, w. v., _to lessen, diminish_: inf. þaet þaet fyr ongan sweethrian,
2703; pret. siethethan Heremodes hild sweethrode, 902.

swefan, st. v.: 1) _to sleep_: pres. sg. III. swefeeth, 1742; inf. swefan,
119, 730, 1673; pret. sg. swaef, 1801; pl. swaefon, 704; swaefun, 1281.--2)
_to sleep the death-sleep, die_: pres. sg. III. swefeeth, 1009, 2061, 2747;
pl. swefaeth, 2257, 2458.

swegel, st. n., _ether, clear sky_: dat. sg. under swegle, 1079, 1198; gen.
sg. under swegles begong, 861, 1774.

swegle, adj., _bright, etherlike, clear_: acc. pl. swegle searo-gimmas,
2750.

swegel-wered, _quasi_ pret. part., _ether-clad_: nom. sg. sunne
swegl-wered, 607.

swelgan, st. v., _to swallow_: pret. sg. w. instr. syn-snaedum swealh
(_swallowed in great bites_), 744; object omitted, subj. pres. nymethe liges
faeethm swulge on swaethule, 783.

for-swelgan, w. acc., _to swallow, consume_: pret. sg. for-swealg, 1123,
2081.

swellan, st. v., _to swell_: inf. þa sio wund on-gan ... swelan and
swellan, 2714.

sweltan, st. v., _to die, perish_: pret. sg. swealt, 1618, 2475; draca
morethre swealt (_died a violent death_), 893, 2783; wundor-deaethe swealt,
3038; hioro-dryncum swealt, 2359.

swencan, w. v., _to swink, oppress, strike_: pret. sg. hine wundra þaes fela
swencte (MS. swecte) on sunde, 1511.

ge-swencan, _to oppress, strike, injure_: pret. sg. syethethan hine Haeethcyn ...
flane geswencte, 2439; pret. part. synnum ge-swenced, 976; haeethstapa hundum
ge-swenced, 1369.--Comp. lyft-ge-swenced.

sweng, st. m., _blow, stroke_: dat. sg. swenge, 1521, 2967; swenge _(with
its stroke_), 2687; instr. pl. sweordes swengum, 2387.--Comp.: feorh-,
hete-, heaetho-, heoro-sweng.

swerian, st. v., _to swear_: pret. w. acc. I. ne me swor fela aetha on unriht
(_swore no false oaths_), 2739; he me aethas swor, 472.

for-swerian, w. instr., _to forswear, renounce (protect with magic
formulae?)_: pret. part. he sige-waepnum for-sworen haefde, 805.

sweg, st. m., _sound, noise, uproar_: nom. sg. sweg, 783; hearpan sweg, 89,
2459, 3024; sige-folca sweg, 645; sang and sweg, 1064; dat. sg. swege,
1215.--Comp.: benc-, morgen-sweg.

swelan, w. v., _to burn_ (here of wounds): inf. swelan, 2714. See swaelan.

sweart, adj., _swart, black, dark_: nom. sg. wudu-rec sweart, 3146; dat.
pl. sweartum nihtum, 167.

sweoethol (cf. O.H.G. suedan, suethan = cremare; M.H.G. swadem = vapor; and
Dietrich in Haupt V., 215), st. m.? n.?, _vapor, smoke, smoking flame_:
dat. sg. ofer swioethole (MS. swic ethole), 3146. See swaethul.

sweofot, st. m., _sleep_: dat. sg. on sweofote, 1582, 2296.

sweoloeth, st. m., _heat, fire, flame_: dat. sg. sweoloethe, 1116. Cf. O.H.G.
suilizo, suilizunga = ardor, cauma.

sweorcan, st. v., _to trouble, darken_. pres. sg. III. ne him inwit-sorh on
sefan sweorceeth (_darkens his soul_), 1738.

for-sweorcan, _to grow dark_ or _dim_: pres. sg. III. eagena bearhtm
for-siteeth and for-sworceeth, 1768.

ge-sweorcan (intrans.), _to darken_: pret. sg. niht-helm ge-swearc, 1790.

sweord, swurd, swyrd, st. n., _sword_: nom. sg. sweord, 1287, 1290, 1570,
1606, 1616, 1697; swurd, 891; acc. sg. sweord, 437, 673, 1559, 1664, 1809,
2253, 2500, etc.; swurd, 539, 1902; swyrd, 2611, 2988; instr. sg. sweorde,
561, 574, 680, 2493, 2881; gen. sg. sweordes, 1107, 2194, 2387; acc. pl.
sweord, 2639; nom. pl., 3049; instr. pl. sweordum, 567, 586, 885; gen. pl.
sweorda, 1041, 2937, 2962.--Comp.: gueth-, maethethum-, waeg-sweord.

sweord, st. f., _oath_: in comp. aeth-sweord _(sword-oath_?), 2065.

sweord-bealo, st. n., _sword-bale, death by the sword_: nom. sg., 1148.

sweord-freca, w. m., _sword-warrior_: dat. sg. sweord-frecan, 1469.

sweord-gifu, st. f., _sword-gift, giving of swords_: nom. sg. swyrd-gifu,
2885.

sweotol, swutol, adj.: 1) _clear, bright_: nom. sg. swutol sang scopes,
90.--2) _plain, manifest_: nom. sg. syndolh sweotol, 818; tacen sweotol,
834; instr. sg. sweotolan tacne, 141.

sweof, sweop. See swafan, swapan.

swieth, st. n.? (O.N. swiethi), _burning pain_: in comp. þryeth-swieth(?).

swift, adj., _swift_: nom. sg. se swifta mearh, 2265.

swimman, swymman, st. v., _to swim_: inf. swymman, 1625.

ofer-swimman, w. acc., _to swim over_ or _through_: pret. sg. ofer-swam
sioleetha bigong (_swam over the sea_), 2368.

swincan, st. v., _to struggle, labor, contend_: pret. pl. git on waeteres
aeht seofon niht swuncon, 517.

ge-swing, st. n., _surge, eddy_: nom. sg. atol yetha geswing, 849.

swingan, st. v., _to swing one's self, fly_: pres. sg. III. ne god hafoc
geond sael swingeeth, 2265.

swican, st. v.: 1) _to deceive, leave in the lurch, abandon_: pret. sg.
naefre hit (_the sword_) aet hilde ne swac manna aengum, 1461.--2) _to
escape_: subj. pret. butan his lic swice, 967.

ge-swican, _to deceive, leave in the lurch_: pret. sg. gueth-bill ge-swac
nacod aet niethe, 2585, 2682; w. dat. seo ecg ge-swac þeodne aet þearfe (_the
sword failed the prince in need_), 1525.

swieth, swyeth (Goth, swinþ-s), adj., _strong, mighty_: nom. sg. waes þaet ge-win
to swyeth, 191.--Comp. nom. sg. sio swiethre hand (_the right hand_), 2099;
_harsh_, 3086.

swiethe, adv., _strongly, very, much_, 598, 998, 1093, 1744, 1927; swyethe,
2171, 2188. Compar. swiethor, _more, rather, more strongly_, 961, 1140, 1875,
2199--Comp. un-swiethe.

ofer-swiethian, w. v., _to overcome, vanquish_, w. acc. of person: pres. sg.
III. oferswyetheeth, 279, 1769.

swieth-ferheth, adj., (_fortis animo_), _strong-minded, bold, brave_: nom. sg.
swyeth-ferheth, 827; gen. sg. swieth-ferhethes, 909; nom. pl. swieth-ferhethe, 493;
dat. pl. swieth-ferhethum, 173.

swieth-hycgend, pres. part. (_strenue cogitans_), _bold-minded, brave in
spirit_: nom. sg. swieth-hycgende, 920; nom. pl. swieth-hycgende, 1017.

swieth-mod, adj., _strong-minded_: nom. sg., 1625.

on-swifan, st. v. w. acc., _to swing, turn, at_ or _against, elevate_:
pret. sg. biorn (Beowulf) bord-rand on-swaf wieth þam gryre-gieste, 2560.

swigian, w. v., _to be silent, keep silent_: pret. sg. lyt swigode niwra
spella (_kept little of the new tidings silent_), 2898; pl. swigedon ealle,
1700.

swigor, adj., _silent, taciturn_: nom, sg. weak, þa waes swigra secg ... on
gylp-spraece gueth-ge-weorca, 981.

swin, swyn, st. n., _swine, boar_ (image on the helm): nom. sg. swyn, 1112;
acc. sg. swin, 1287.

swin-lic, st. n., _swine-image_ or _body_: instr. pl. swin-licum, 1454.

swogan, st. v., _to whistle, roar_: pres. part. swogende leg, 3146.

swutol. See sweotol.

swylc, swilc (Goth, swa-leik-s), demons, adj. = _talis, such, such a_;
relative = _qualis, as, which_: nom. sg. swylc, 178, 1941, 2542, 2709;
swylc ... swylc=talis ... qualis, 1329; acc. sg. swylc, 2799; eall ...
swylc (_all ... which, as_), 72; oether swylc (_such another_, i.e. hand),
1584; on swylc (_on such things_), 997; dat. sg. gueth-fremmendra swylcum
(_to such a battle-worker_, i.e. Beowulf), 299; gen. sg. swylces hwaet
(_some such_), 881; acc. pl. swylce, 2870; call swylce ... swylce, 3166;
swylce twegen (_two such_), 1348; ealle þearfe swylce (_all needs that_),
1798; swylce hie ... findan meahton sigla searo-gimma (_such as they might
find of jewels and cunning gems_), 1157; efne swylce maela swylce (_at just
such times as_), 1250; gen. pl. swylcra searo-nietha, 582; swylcra fela ...
aer-gestreona, 2232.

swylce, adv., _as, as also, likewise, similarly_, 113, 293, 758, 831, 855,
908, 921, 1147, 1166, 1428, 1483, 2460, 2825; ge swylce (_and likewise_),
2259; swilce, 1153.

swylt, st. m., _death_: nom. sg., 1256, 1437.

swylt-daeg, st. m., _death-day_: dat. sg. aer swylt-daege, 2799.

swynsian, w. v., _to sound_: pret. sg. hlyn swynsode, 612.

swyrd. See sweord.

swyethl. See swieth.

swyn. See swin.

syethethan (seethian, Gen. 1525), w. v., _to punish, avenge_, w. acc.: inf. þonne
hit sweordes ecg syethethan scolde (_then the edge of the sword should avenge
it_), 1107.

syethethan. See siethethan.

syfan-wintre, adj., _seven-winters-old_: nom. sg., 2429.

syheth. See seon.

syl (O.H.G. swella), st. f., _sill, bench-support_: dat. sg. fram sylle,
776.

sylfa. See selfa.

syllan. See sellan.

syllic. See sellic.

symbol, syml, st. n., _banquet, entertainment_: acc. sg. symbel, 620, 1011;
geaf me sinc and symbel (_gave me treasure and feasting_, i.e. made me his
friend and table-companion), 2432; þaet hie ... symbel ymbsaeton (_that they
might sit round their banquet_), 564; dat. sg. symle, 81, 489, 1009;
symble, 119, 2105; gen. pl. symbla, 1233.

symble, symle, adv., _continually, ever_: symble, 2451; symle, 2498; symle
waes þy saemra (_he was ever the worse, the weaker_, i.e. the dragon), 2881.

symbel-wyn, st. f., _banqueting-pleasure, joy at feasting_: acc. sg.
symbel-wynne dreoh, 1783.

syn, st. f., _sin, crime_: nom. synn and sacu, 2473; dat. instr. pl.
synnum, 976, 1256, 3072.

syn. See sin.

syn-bysig, adj., (culpa laborans), _persecuted on account of guilt?_
(Rieger), _guilt-haunted?_: nom. sg. secg syn-[by]sig, 2228.

ge-syngian, w. v., _to sin, commit a crime_: pret. part. þaet waes feohleas
ge-feoht, fyrenum ge-syngad, 2442.

synnig, adj., _sin-laden, sinful_: acc. sg. m. sinnigne secg, 1380.--Comp.:
fela-, un-synnig.

ge-synto, f., _health_: dat. pl. on gesyntum, 1870.

syrce. See serce.

syrwan, w. v. w. acc., _to entrap, catch unawares_: pret. sg. duguethe and
geogoethe seomade and syrede, 161.

be-syrwan: 1) _to compass_ or _accomplish by finesse; effect_: inf. daed þe
we ealle aer ne meahton snyttrum be-syrwan (_a deed that all of us could not
accomplish before with all our wisdom_), 943.--2) _to entrap by guile and
destroy_: inf. mynte se manscaetha manna cynnes sumne be-syrwan (_the fell
foe thought to entrap some one (all?_, see sum) _of the men_), 714.

syn, f., _seeing, sight, scene_: comp, an-syn.

ge-syne, adj., _visible, to be seen_: nom. sg. 1256, 1404, 2948, 3059,
3160.--Comp.: eeth-ge-syne, yeth-ge-sene.


T

taligean, w. v.: 1) _to count, reckon, number; esteem, think_: pres. sg. I.
no ic me ... hnagran gueth-geweorca þonne Grendel hine (_count myself no
worse than G. in battle-works_), 678; wen ic talige ...þaet (_I count on the
hope ... that_), 1846; telge, 2068; sg. III. þaet raed talaeth þaet (_counts it
gain that_), 2028.--2) _to tell, relate_: soeth ic talige (_I tell facts_),
532; swa þu self talast (_as thou thyself sayst_), 595.

tacen, st. n., _token, sign, evidence_: nom. sg. tacen sweotol, 834; dat.
instr. sg. sweotolan tacne, 141; tires to tacne, 1655.--Comp. luf-tacen.

tan, st. m., _twig_: in comp. ater-tan. [emended to ater-tearum in
text--KTH]

ge-taecan, w. v., _to show, point out_: pret. sg. him þa hilde-deor hof
modigra torht ge-taehte (_the warrior pointed out to them the bright
dwelling of the bold ones_, i.e. Danes), 313. Hence, _to indicate, assign_:
pret. sona me se maera mago Healfdenes ... wieth his sylfes sunu setl getaehte
(_assigned me a seat by his own son_), 2014.

taele, adj., _blameworthy_: in comp. un-taele.

ge-taese, adj., _quiet, still_: nom. sg. gif him waere ... niht ge-taese
(_whether he had a pleasant, quiet, night_), 1321.

tela, adv., _fittingly, well_, 949, 1219, 1226, 1821, 2209, 2738.

telge. See talian.

tellan, w. v., _to tell, consider, deem_: pret. sg. ne his lif-dagas leoda
aenigum nytte tealde (_nor did he count his life useful to any man_), 795;
þaet ic me aenigne under swegles begong ge-sacan ne tealde (_I believed not
that I had any foe under heaven_), 1774; cwaeeth he þone gueth-wine godne tealde
(_said he counted the war-friend good_), 1811; he usic gar-wigend gode
tealde (_deemed us good spear-warriors_), 2642; pl. swa (_so that_) hine
Geata beam godne ne tealdon, 2185.--2) _to ascribe, count against, impose_:
pret. sg. (Þryetho) him waelbende weotode tealde hand-gewriethene, 1937.

ge-tenge, adj., _attached to, lying on_: w. dat. gold ... grunde ge-tenge,
2759.

tear, st. m., _tear_: nom. pl. tearas, 1873.

teoh, st. f., _troop, band_: dat. sg. earmre teohhe, 2939.

(ge?)-teohhian, w. v., _to fix, determine, assign_: pret. sg. ic for laessan
lean teohhode ... hnahran rince, 952; pres. part. waes oether in aer geteohhod
(_assigned_)... maerum Geate, 1301.

teon, st. v., _to draw, lead_: inf. heht ... eahta mearas ... on flet teon
(_bade eight horses be led into the hall_), 1037; pret. sg. me to grunde
teah fah feond-sceaetha (_the many-hued fiend-foe drew me to the bottom_),
553; eft-siethas teah (_withdrew, returned_), 1333; sg. for pl. aeg-hwylcum
...þara þe mid Beowulfe brim-lade teah (_to each of those that crossed the
sea with B._) 1052; pret. part. þa waes ... heard ecg togen (_then was the
hard edge drawn_), 1289; weareth ... on naes togen (_was drawn to the
promontory_), 1440.

a-teon, _to wander, go_, intrans.: pret. sg. to Heorute a-teah (_drew to
Heorot_), 767.

ge-teon: 1) _to draw_: pret. sg. gomel swyrd ge-teah, 2611; w. instr. and
acc. hyre seaxe ge-teah, brad brun-ecg, 1546.--2) _to grant, give, lend_:
imp. no þu him wearne geteoh þinra gegn-cwida glaednian (_refuse not to
gladden them with thy answer_), 366; pret. sg. and þa Beowulfe bega
gehwaeethres eodor Ingwina onweald ge-teah (_and the prince of the Ingwins
gave B. power over both_), 1045; so, he him est geteah (_gave possession
of_), 2166.

of-teon, _to deprive, withdraw_, w. gen. of thing and dat. pers.: pret. sg.
Scyld Scefing ... monegum maegethum meodo-setla of-teah, 5; w. acc. of thing,
hond ... feorh-sweng ne of-teah, 2490; w. dat. hond (hord, MS.) swenge ne
of-teah, 1521.

þurh-teon, _to effect_: inf. gif he torn-gemot þurh-teon mihte, 1141.

teon (cf. teoh, _materia_, O.H.G. ziuc), w. v. w. acc., _to make, work_:
pret. sg. teode, 1453;--_to furnish out, deck_: pret. pl. nalas hi hine
laessan lacum teodan (_provided him with no less gifts_), 43.

ge-teon, _to provide, do, bring on_: pres. sg. unc sceal weorethan ... swa
unc Wyrd ge-teoeth, 2527; pret. sg. þe him ... sare ge-teode (_who had done
him this harm_), 2296.

ge-teona, w. m., _injurer, harmer_: in comp. laeth-ge-teona.

til, adj., _good, apt, fit_: nom. sg. m. Halga til, 61; þegn ungemete till
(of Wiglaf), 2722; fem. waes seo þeod tilu, 1251; neut. ne waes þaet ge-wrixle
til, 1305.

tilian, w. v. w. gen., _to gain, win_: inf. gif ic ... owihte maeg þinre
mod-lufan maran tilian (_if I ... gain_), 1824.

timbrian, w. v., _to build_: pret. part. acc. sg. sael timbred (_the
well-built hall_), 307.

be-timbrian, (construere), _to finish building, complete_: pret. pl.
betimbredon on tyn dagum beadu-rofes becn, 3161.

tid, st. f., _-tide, time_: acc. sg. twelf wintra tid, 147; lange tid,
1916; in þa tide, 2228.--Comp.: an-, morgen-tid.

ge-tiethian (from tigethian), w. v., _to grant_: pret. part. impers. waes ...
bene (gen.) ge-tiethad feasceaftum men, 2285.

tir, st. m., _glory, repute in war_. gen. sg. tires, 1655.

tir-eadig, adj., _glorious, famous_: dat. sg. tir-eadigum menn (of
Beowulf), 2190.

tir-faest, adj., _famous, rich in glory_. nom. sg. (of Hroethgar), 923.

tir-leas, adj., _without glory, infamous_: gen. sg. (of Grendel), 844.

toga, w. m., _leader_: in comp. folc-toga.

torht, adj., _bright, brilliant_: acc. sg. neut. hof ... torht,
313.--Comp.: wuldor-torht, heaetho-torht (_loud in battle_).

torn, st. n.: 1) _wrath, insult, distress_: acc. sg. torn, 147, 834; gen.
pl. torna, 2190.--2) _anger_: instr. sg. torne ge-bolgen, 2402.--Comp.
lige-torn.

torn, adj., _bitter, cruel_: nom. sg, hreowa tornost, 2130.

torn-ge-mot, st. n., (_wrathful meeting_), _angry engagement, battle_: acc.
sg., 1141.

to, I. prep. w. dat. indicating direction or tending to, hence: 1) local =
whither after verbs of motion, _to, up to, at_: com to recede (_to the
hall_), 721; eode to sele, 920; eode to hire frean sittan, 642; gaeeth eft ...
to medo (_goeth again to mead_), 605; wand to wolcnum (_wound to the
welkin_), 1120; sigon to slaepe (_sank to sleep_), 1252; 28, 158, 234, 438,
553, 926, 1010, 1014, 1155, 1159, 1233, etc.; lieth-waege baer haelum to handa
(_bore the ale-cup to the hands of the men? at hand?_), 1984; oeth þaet niht
becom oether to yldum, 2118; him to bearme cwom maethethum-faet maere (_came to his
hands, into his possession_), 2405; saelde to sande sid-faeethme scip
(_fastened the broad-bosomed ship to the shore_), 1918; þat se harm-scaetha
to Heorute a-teah (_went forth to Heorot_), 767. After verb sittan: site nu
to symble (_sit now to the meal_), 489; siethethan ... we to symble geseten
haefdon, 2105; to ham (_home, at home_), 124, 374, 2993. With verbs of
speaking: maethelode to his wine-drihtne (_spake to his friendly lord_), 360;
to Geatum sprec, 1172; so, heht þaet heaetho-weorc to hagan biodan (_bade the
battle-work be told at the hedge_), 2893.--2) with verbs of bringing and
taking (cf. under on, I., d): hraethe waes to bure Beowulf fetod (_B. was
hastily brought from a room_), 1311; siethethan Hama aet-waeg to þaere byrhtan
byrig Brosinga mene (_since H. carried the Brosing-necklace off from the
bright city_), 1200; wean ahsode. faehetho to Frysum (_suffered woe, feud as
to, from, the Frisians_), 1208.--3) =end of motion, hence: a) _to, for, as,
in_: þone god sende folce to frofre (_for, as, a help to the folk_), 14;
gesette ... sunnan and monan leoman to leohte (_as a light_), 95; ge-saet
... to rune (_sat in counsel_), 172; weareth he Heaetho-lafe to hand-bonan,
460; bringe ... to helpe (_bring to, for, help_), 1831; Jofore forgeaf
angan dohtor ... hyldo to wedde (_as a pledge of his favor_), 2999; so,
508(?), 666, 907, 972, 1022, 1187, 1263, 1331, 1708, 1712, 2080, etc.;
secgan to soethe (_to say in sooth_), 51; so, 591, 2326. b) with verbs of
thinking, hoping, etc., _on, for, at, against_: he to gyrn-wraece swiethor
þohte þonne to sae-lade (_thought more on vengeance than on the
sea-voyage_), 1139; saecce ne weneeth to Gar-Denum (_nor weeneth of conflict
with the Spear-Danes_), 602; þonne wene ic to þe wyrsan geþinges (_then I
expect for thee a worse result_), 525; ne ic to Sweoþeode sibbe oethethe treowe
wihte ne wene (_nor expect at all of, from, the Swedes_ ...), 2923; wiste
þaem ahlaecan to þaem heah-sele hilde ge-þinged (_battle prepared for the
monster in the high hall_), 648; wel bieth þaem þe mot to faeder faeethmum freoetho
wilnian (_well for him that can find peace in the Father's arms_), 188;
þara þe he ge-worhte to West-Denum (_of those that he wrought against the
West-Danes_), 1579.--4) with the gerund, inf.: to gefremmanne (_to do_),
174; to ge-cyethanne (_to make known_), 257; to secganne (_to say_), 473; to
befleonne (_to avoid, escape_), 1004; so, 1420, 1725, 1732, 1806, 1852,
1923, 1942, etc. With inf.: to feran, 316; to friclan, 2557.--5) temporal:
gewat him to gescaep-hwile (_went at(?) the hour of fate_; or, _to his fated
rest?_), 26; to widan feore (_ever, in their lives_), 934; awa to aldre
(_for life, forever_), 956; so, to aldre, 2006, 2499; to life (_during
life, ever_), 2433.--6) with particles: wod under wolcnum to þaes þe ...
(_went under the welkin to the point where_ ...), 715; so, elne ge-eodon to
þaes þe, 1968; so, 2411; he him þaes lean for-geald ... to þaes þe he on reste
geseah Grendel licgan (_he paid him for that to the point that he saw G.
lying dead_), 1586; waes þaet blod to þaes hat (_the blood was hot to that
degree_), 1617; naes þa long to þon þaet (_'twas not long till_), 2592, 2846;
waes him se man to þon leof þaet (_the man was dear to him to that degree_),
1877; to hwan siethethan weareth hond-raes haeleetha (_up to what point, how, the
hand-contest turned out_), 2072; to middes (_in the midst_), 3142.

II. Adverbial modifier, _quasi_ preposition [better explained in many cases
as prep. postponed]: l) _to, towards, up to, at_: geong sona to, 1786; so,
2649; feheth oether to, 1756; sae-lac ... þe þu her to locast (_upon which thou
here lookest_), 1655; folc to saegon (_the folk looked on_), 1423; þaet hi
him to mihton gegnum gangan (_might proceed thereto_), 313; se þe him
bealwa to bote gelyfde (_who believed in help out of evils from him_, i.e.
Beowulf), 910; him to anwaldan are ge-lyfde (_trusted for himself to the
Almighty's help_), 1273; þe us seceaeth to Sweona leode (_that the Swedes
will come against us_), 3002.--2) before adj. and adv., _too_: to strang
(_too mighty_), 133; to faest, 137; to swyeth, 191; so, 789, 970, 1337, 1743,
1749, etc.; to fela micles (_far too much_), 695; he to foreth ge-stop (_he
had gone too far_), 2290.

toeth (G. tunþu-s), st. m., _tooth_: in comp. blodig-toeth (adj.).

tredan, st. v. w. acc., _to tread_: inf. sae-wong tredan, 1965; el-land
tredan, 3020; pret. sg. wraec-lastas traed, 1353; medo-wongas traed, 1644;
graes-moldan traed, 1882.

treddian, tryddian (see trod), w. v., _to stride, tread, go_: pret. sg.
treddode, 726; tryddode getrume micle (_strode about with a strong troop_),
923.

trem, st. n., _piece, part_: acc. sg. ne ... fotes trem (_not a foot's
breadth_), 2526.

treow, st. f., _fidelity, good faith_: acc. sg. treowe, 1073; sibbe oethethe
treowe, 2923.

treow, st. n., _tree_: in comp. galg-treow.

treowian. See truwian.

treow-loga, w. m., _troth-breaker, pledge-breaker_: nom. pl. treow-logan,
2848.

trodu, st. f., _track, step_: acc. sg. or pl. trode, 844.

ge-trum, st. n., _troop, band_: instr. sg. ge-trume micle, 923.

trum, adj., _strong, endowed with_: nom. sg. heorot hornum trum, 1370.

ge-truwan, w. v. w. acc., _to confirm, pledge solemnly_: pret. sg. þa hie
getruwedon on twa healfe faeste frioethu-waere, 1096.

truwian, treowan, w. v., _to trust in, rely on, believe in_: 1) w. dat.:
pret. sg. siethe ne truwode leofes mannes (_I trusted not in the dear man's
enterprise_), 1994; bearne ne truwode þaet he ... (_she trusted not the
child that_ ...), 2371; gehwylc hiora his ferhethe treowde þaet he ... (_each
trusted his heart that_ ...), 1167.--2) w. gen.: pret. sg. Geata leod
georne truwode modgan maegnes, 670; wiethres ne truwode, 2954.

ge-truwian, _to rely on, trust in_, w. dat.: pret. sg. strenge ge-truwode,
mund-gripe maegenes, 1534;--w. gen. pret. sg. beorges ge-truwode, wiges and
wealles, 2323; strenge ge-truwode anes mannes, 2541.

tryddian. See treddian.

trywe, adj., _true, faithful_: nom. sg. þa gyt waes ... aeghwylc oethrum trywe,
1166.

ge-trywe, adj., _faithful_: nom. sg. her is aeghwylc eorl oethrum ge-trywe,
1229.

turf, st. f., _sod, soil, seat_: in comp. eethel-turf.

tux, st. m., _tooth, tusk_: in comp. hilde-tux.

ge-twaefan, w. v. w. acc. of person and gen. thing, _to separate, divide,
deprive of, hinder_: pres. sg. III. þaet þec adl oethethe ecg eafoethes ge-twaefeeth
(_robs of strength_), 1764; inf. god eaethe maeg þone dol-scaethan daeda
ge-twaefan (_God may easily restrain the fierce foe from his deeds_), 479;
pret. sg. sumne Geata leod ... feores getwaefde (_cut him off from life_),
1434; no þaer waeg-flotan wind ofer yethum siethes ge-twaefde (_the wind hindered
not the wave-floater in her course over the water_), 1909; pret. part. aet
rihte waes gueth ge-twaefed (_almost had the struggle been ended_), 1659.

ge-twaeman, w. v. acc. pers. and gen. thing, _to hinder, render incapable
of, restrain_: inf. ic hine ne mihte ... ganges getwaeman, 969.

twegen, m. f. n. twa, num., _twain, two_: nom. m. twegen, 1164; acc. m.
twegen, 1348; dat. twaem, 1192 gen. twega, 2533; acc. f. twa, 1096, 1195.

twelf, num., _twelve_, gen. twelfa, 3172.

tweone (Frisian twine), num. = _bini, two_: dat. pl. be saem tweonum, 859,
1298; 1686.

twidig, adj., in comp. lang-twidig (_long-assured_), 1709.

tyder, st. m., _race, descendant_: in comp. un-tyder, 111.

tydre (Frisian teddre), adj., _weak, unwarlike, cowardly_: nom. pl. tydre,
2848.

tyn, num., _ten_: uninflect. dat. on tyn dagum, 3161; inflect. nom. tyne,
2848.

tyrwian, w. v., _to tar_: pret. part. tyrwed in comp.: niw-tyrwed.

on-tyhtan, w. v., _to urge on, incite, entice_: pret. sg. on-tyhte, 3087.


Þ

þafian, w. v. w. acc., _to submit to, endure_: inf. þaet se þeod-cyning
þafian sceolde Eofores anne dom, 2964.

þanc, st. m.: 1) _thought_: in comp. fore-, hete-, or-, searo-þanc;
inwit-þanc (adj.).--2) _thanks_ (w. gen. of thing): nom. sg., 929, 1779;
acc. sg. þanc, 1998, 2795.--3) _content, favor, pleasure_: dat. sg. þa þe
gif-sceattas Geata fyredon þyder to þance (_those that tribute for the
Geatas carried thither for favor_). 379.

ge-þanc, st. m., _thought_: instr. pl. þeostrum ge-þoncum, 2333.--Comp.
mod-ge-þanc.

þanc-hycgende, pres. part., _thoughtful_, 2236.

þancian, w. v., _to thank_: pret. sg. gode þancode ... þaes þe hire se willa
ge-lamp (_thanked God that her wish was granted_), 626; so, 1398; pl.
þancedon, 627(?).

þanon, þonon, þonan, adv., _thence_: 1) local: þanon eft gewat (_he went
thence back_), 123; þanon up ... stigon (_went up thence_), 224; so, þanon,
463, 692, 764, 845, 854, 1293; þanan, 1881; þonon, 520, 1374, 2409; þonan,
820, 2360, 2957.--2) personal: þanon untydras ealle on-wocon (_from him_,
i.e. Cain, etc.), 111; so, þanan, 1266; þonon, 1961; unsofte þonon feorh
oeth-ferede (i.e. from Grendel's mother), 2141.

þa, adv.: l) _there, then_, 3, 26, 28, 34, 47, 53, etc. With þaer: þa þaer,
331. With nu: nu þa (_now then_), 658.--2) conjunction, _when, as, since_,
w. indic., 461, 539, 633, etc.;--_because, whilst, during, since_, 402,
465, 724, 2551, etc.

þaet, I. demons, pron. acc. neut. of se: demons, nom. þaet (_that_), 735,
766, etc.; instr. sg. þy, 1798, 2029; þaet ic þy waepne ge-braed (_that I
brandished as(?) a weapon; that I brandished the weapon?_), 1665; þy
weorethra (_the more honored_), 1903; þy seft (_the more easily_), 2750; þy
laes hym yethe þrym wudu wynsuman for-wrecan meahte (_lest the force of the
waves the winsome boat might carry away_), 1919; no þy aer (_not sooner_),
755, 1503, 2082, 2374, 2467; no þy leng (_no longer, none the longer_),
975. þy =adv., _therefore, hence_, 1274, 2068; þe ... þe = _on this
account; for this reason ... that, because_, 2639-2642; wiste þe geornor
(_knew but too well_), 822; he ... waes sundes þe saenra þe hine swylt fornam
(_he was the slower in swimming as [whom?] death carried him off_), 1437;
naes him wihte þe sel (_it was none the better for him_), 2688; so, 2278.
Gen. sg. þaes = adv., _for this reason, therefore_, 7, 16, 114, 350, 589,
901, 1993, 2027, 2033, etc. þaes þe, especially after verbs of thanking, =
_because_, 108, 228, 627, 1780, 2798;--also = secundum quod: þaes þe hie
gewislicost ge-witan meahton, 1351;--_therefore, accordingly_, 1342, 3001;
to þaes (_to that point; to that degree_), 715, 1586, 1617, 1968, 2411; þaes
georne (_so firmly_), 969; ac he þaes faeste waes ... besmiethod (_it was too
firmly set_), 774; no þaes frod leofaeth gumena bearna þaet þone grund wite
(_none liveth among men so wise that he should know its bottom_), 1368; he
þaes (þaem, MS.) modig waes (_had the courage for it_), 1509.

II. conj. (relative), _that, so that_, 15, 62, 84, 221, 347, 358, 392, 571,
etc.; oeth þaet (_up to that, until_); see oeth.

þaette (from þaet þe, see þe), _that_, 151, 859, 1257, 2925, etc.; þaet þe
(_that_), 1847.

þaer: 1) demons. adv., _there (where)_, 32, 36, 89, 400, 757, etc.;
morethor-bealo maga, þaer heo aer maeste heold worolde wynne (_the death-bale of
kinsmen where before she had most worldly joy_), 1080. With þa: þa þaer,
331; þaer on innan (_therein_), 71. Almost like Eng. expletive _there_, 271,
550, 978, etc.;--_then, at that time_, 440;--_thither_: þaer swieth-ferhethe
sittan eodon (_thither went the bold ones to sit_, i.e. to the bench), 493,
etc.--2) relative, _where_, 356, 420, 508, 513, 522, 694, 867, etc.; eode
... þaer se snottra bad (_went where the wise one tarried_), 1314; so,
1816;--_if_, 763, 798, 1836, 2731, etc.;--_whither_: ga þaer he wille, 1395.

þe, I. relative particle, indecl., partly standing alone, partly associated
with se, seo, þaet: Hunfereth maethelode, þe aet fotum saet (_H., who sat at his
feet, spake_), 500; so, 138, etc.; waes þaet gewin to swyeth þe on þa leode
be-com (_the misery that had come on the people was too great_), 192, etc.;
ic wille ... þe þa and-sware aedre ge-cyethan þe me se goda a-gifan þenceeth (_I
will straightway tell thee the answer that the good one shall give_), 355;
oeth þone anne daeg þe he ... (_till that very day that he_ ...), 2401; heo þa
faehethe wraec þe þu ... Grendel cwealdest (_the fight in which thou slewest
G._), 1335; mid þaere sorge þe him sio sar belamp (_with the sorrow
wherewith the pain had visited him_), 2469; pl. þonne þa dydon þe ...
(_than they did that_ ...), 45; so, 378, 1136; þa maethmas þe he me sealde
(_the treasures that he gave me_), 2491; so, ginfaestan gife þe him god
sealde (_the great gifts that God had given him_), 2183. After þara þe (_of
those that_), the depend. verb often takes sg. instead of pl. (Dietrich,
Haupt XI., 444 seqq.): wundor-siona fela secga ge-hwylcum þara þe on swylc
staraeth (_to each of those that look on such_), 997; so, 844, 1462, 2384,
2736. Strengthened by se, seo, þaet: saegde se þe cuethe (_said he that knew_),
90; waes se grimma gaest Grendel haten, se þe moras heold (_the grim stranger
hight Grendel, he that held the moors_), 103; here-byrne ... seo þe
ban-cofan beorgan cuethe (_the corselet that could protect the body_), 1446,
etc.; þaer ge-lyfan sceal dryhtnes dome se þe hine deaeth nimeeth (_he shall
believe in God's judgment whom death carrieth off_), 441; so, 1437, 1292
(cf. Heliand I., 1308).

þaes þe. See þaet.

þeah þe. See þeah.

for þam þe. See for-þam.

þy, þe, _the, by that_, instr. of se: ahte ic holdra þy laes ... þe deaeth
for-nam (_I had the less friends whom death snatched away_), 488; so, 1437.

þeccan, w. v., _to cover_ (thatch), _cover over_: inf. þa sceal brond
fretan, aeled þeccean (_fire shall eat, flame shall cover, the treasures_),
3016; pret. pl. þaer git eagor-stream earmum þehton (_in swimming_), 513.

þegn, st. m., _thane, liegeman, king's higher vassal; knight_: nom. sg.,
235, 494, 868, 2060, 2710; (Beowulf), 194; (Wiglaf), 2722; acc. sg. þegen
(Beowulf, MS. þegn), 1872; dat. sg. þegne, 1342, 1420; (Hengest), 1086;
(Wiglaf), 2811; gen. sg. þegnes, 1798; nom. pl. þegnas, 1231; acc. pl.
þegnas, 1082, 3122; dat. pl. þegnum, 2870; gen. pl. þegna, 123, 400, 1628,
1674, 1830, 2034, etc.--Comp.: ambiht-, ealdor-, heal-, magu-, sele-þegn.

þegnian, þenian, w. v., _to serve, do liege service_: pret. sg. ic him
þenode deoran sweorde (_I served them with my good sword_, i.e. slew them
with it), 560.

þegn-sorh, st. f., _thane-sorrow, grief for a liegeman_: acc. sg.
þegn-sorge, 131.

þegu, st. f., _taking_: in comp.: beah-, beor-, sinc-þegu.

þel, st. n., _deal-board, board for benches_: in comp. benc-þel, 486, 1240.

þencan, w. v.: 1) _to think_: absolutely: pres. sg. III. se þe wel þenceeth,
289; so, 2602. With depend. clause: pres. sg. naenig heora þohte þaet he ...
(_none of them thought that he_), 692.--2) w. inf., _to intend_: pres. sg.
III. þa and-sware ... þe me se goda a-gifan þenceeth (_the answer that the
good one intendeth to give me_), 355; (blodig wael) byrgean þenceeth, 448;
þonne he ... gegan þenceeth longsumne lof (_if he will win eternal fame_),
1536; pret. sg. ne þaet aglaeca yldan þohte (_the monster did not mean to
delay that_), 740; pret. pl. wit unc wieth hronfixas werian þohton, 541;
(hine) on healfa ge-hwone heawan þohton, 801.

a-þencan, _to intend, think out_: pret. sg. (he) þis ellen-weorc ana
a-þohte to ge-fremmanne, 2644.

ge-þencan, w. acc.: 1) _to think of_: þaet he his selfa ne maeg ... ende
ge-þencean (_so that he himself may not think of, know, its limit_),
1735.--2) _to be mindful_: imper. sg. ge-þenc nu ... hwaet wit geo spraecon,
1475.

þenden: 1) adv., _at this time, then, whilst_: nalles facen-stafas
Þeod-Scyldingas þenden fremedon (_not at all at this time had the Scyldings
done foul deeds_), 1020 (referring to 1165; cf. Widsieth, 45 seqq.); þenden
reafode rinc oetherne (_whilst one warrior robbed another_, i.e. Eofor robbed
Ongenþeow), 2986.--2) conj., _so long as, whilst_, 30, 57, 284, 1860, 2039,
2500, 3028;--_whilst_, 2419. With subj., _whilst, as long as_: þenden þu
mote, 1178; þenden þu lifige, 1255; þenden hyt sy (_whilst the heat
lasts_), 2650.

þengel, st. m., _prince, lord, ruler_: acc. sg. hringa þengel (Beowulf),
1508.

þes (m.), þeos (f.), þis (n.), demons. pron., _this_: nom. sg. 411, 432,
1703; f., 484; nom. acc. neut., 2156, 2252, 2644; þys, 1396; acc. sg. m.
þisne, 75; f. þas, 1682; dat. sg. neut. þissum, 1170; þyssum, 2640; f.
þisse, 639; gen. m. þisses, 1217; f. þisse, 929; neut. þysses, 791, 807;
nom. pl. and acc. þas, 1623, 1653, 2636, 2641; dat. þyssum, 1063, 1220.

þe. See þaet.

þeh. See þeah.

þearf, st. f., _need_: nom. sg. þearf, 1251, 2494, 2638; þa him waes manna
þearf (_as he was in need of men_), 201; acc. sg. þearfe, 1457, 2580, 2850;
fremmaeth ge nu leoda þearfe (_do ye now what is needful for the folk_),
2802; dat. sg. aet þearfe, 1478, 1526, 2695, 2710; acc. pl. se for andrysnum
ealle beweotede þegnes þearfe (_who would supply in courtesy all the
thane's needs_), 1798 (cf. sele-þegn, 1795).--Comp.: firen-, nearo-,
ofer-þearf.

þearf. See þurfan.

ge-þearfian, w. v., = _necessitatem imponere_: pret. part. þa him swa
ge-þearfod waes (_since so they found it necessary_), 1104.

þearle, adv., _very, exceedingly_, 560.

þeah, þeh, conj., _though, even though_ or _if_: 1) with subj. þeah, 203,
526, 588, 590, 1168, 1661, 2032, 2162. Strengthened by þe: þeah þe, 683,
1369, 1832, 1928, 1942, 2345, 2620; þeah ... eal (_although_), 681.--2)
with indic.: þeah, 1103; þeh, 1614.--3) doubtful: þeah he uethe wel, 2856;
swa þeah (_nevertheless_), 2879; no ... swa þeah (_not then however_), 973;
naes þe forht swa þeh (_he was not, though, afraid_), 2968; hwaeethre swa þeah
(_yet however_), 2443.

þeaw, st. m., _custom, usage_: nom. sg., 178, 1247; acc. sg. þeaw, 359;
instr. pl. þeawum (_in accordance with custom_), 2145.

þeod, st. f.: 1) _war-troop, retainers_: nom. sg., 644, 1231, 1251.--2)
_nation, folk_: nom. sg., 1692; gen. pl. þeoda, 1706.--Comp.: sige-,
wer-þeod.

þeod-cyning, st. m., (=folc-cyning), _warrior-king, king of the people_:
nom. sg. (Hroethgar), 2145; (Ongenþeow), 2964, 2971; þiod-cyning (Beowulf),
2580; acc. sg. þeod-cyning (Beowulf), 3009; gen. sg. þeod-cyninges
(Beowulf), 2695; gen. pl. þeod-cyninga, 2.

þeoden, st. m., _lord of a troop, war-chief, king; ruler_: nom. sg., 129,
365, 417, 1047, 1210, 1676, etc.; þioden, 2337, 2811; acc. sg. þeoden, 34,
201, 353, 1599, 2385, 2722, 2884, 3080; þioden, 2789; dat. sg. þeodne, 345,
1526, 1993, 2573, 2710, etc.; þeoden, 2033; gen. sg. þeodnes 798, 911,
1086, 1628, 1838, 2175; þiodnes, 2657; nom. pl. þeodnas, 3071.

þeoden-leas, adj., _without chief_ or _king_: nom. pl. þeoden-lease, 1104.

þeod-gestreon, st. n., _people's-jewel, precious treasure_: instr. pl.
þeod-ge-streonum, 44; gen. pl. þeod-ge-streona, 1219.

þeodig, adj., _appertaining to a_ þeod: in comp. el-þeodig.

þeod-scaetha, w. m., _foe of the people, general foe_: nom. sg. þeod-sceaetha
(_the dragon_), 2279, 2689.

þeod-þrea, st. f. m., _popular misery, general distress_: dat. pl. wieth
þeod-þreaum, 178.

þeof, st. m., _thief_: gen. sg. þeofes craefte, 2221.

þeon, st. v.: 1) _to grow, ripen, thrive_: pret. sg. weorethmyndum þah (_grew
in glory_), 8.--2) _to thrive in, succeed_: pret. sg. huru þaet on lande lyt
manna þah (_that throve to few_), 2837. See Note, l. 901.

ge-þeon, _to grow, thrive; increase in power and influence_: imper. ge-þeoh
tela, 1219; inf. lof-daedum sceal ... man geþeon, 25; þaet þaet þeodnes bearn
ge-þeon scolde, 911.

on-þeon? _to begin, undertake_, w. gen.: pret. he þaes aer onþah, 901. [In
MS. Emended in text.--KTH] See Note, l. 901.

þeon (for þeowan), w. v., _to oppress, restrain_: inf. naes se folc-cyning
ymb-sittendra aenig þara þe mec ... dorste egesan þeon (_that durst oppress
me with terror_), 2737.

þeostor, adj., _dark, gloomy_: instr. pl. þeostrum ge-þoncum, 2333.

þicgan, st. v. w. acc., _to seize, attain, eat, appropriate_: inf. þaet he
(Grendel) ma moste manna cynnes þicgean ofer þa niht, 737; symbel þicgan
(_take the meal, enjoy the feast_), 1011; pret. pl. þaet hie me þegon, 563;
þaer we medu þegun, 2634.

ge-þicgan, w. acc., _to grasp, take_: pret. sg. (symbel and sele-ful, ful)
ge-þeah, 619, 629; Beowulf ge-þah ful on flette, 1025; pret. pl. (medo-ful
manig) ge-þaegon, 1015.

þider, þyder, adv., _thither_: þyder, 3087, 379, 2971.

þihtig, þyhtig, adj., _doughty, vigorous, firm_: acc. sg. neut. sweord ...
ecgum þyhtig, 1559.--Comp. hyge-þihtig.

þincan. See þyncan.

þing, st. n.: 1) _thing_: gen. pl. aenige þinga (_ullo modo_), 792, 2375,
2906.--2) _affair, contest, controversy_: nom. sg. me weareth Grendles þing
... undyrne cueth (_Grendel's doings became known to me_), 409.--3)
_judgment, issue, judicial assembly_(?): acc. sg. sceal ... ana gehegan
þing wieth þyrse (_shall bring the matter alone to an issue against the
giant_: see hegan), 426.

ge-þing, st. n.: 1) _terms, covenant_: acc. pl. ge-þingo, 1086.--2) _fate,
providence, issue_: gen. sg. ge-þinges, 398, 710; (ge-þingea, MS.), 525.

ge-þingan, st. v., _to grow, mature, thrive_ (Dietrich, Haupt IX., 430):
pret. part. cwen mode ge-þungen (_mature-minded, high-spirited, queen_),
625. See wel-þungen.

ge-þingan (see ge-þing), w. v.: 1) _to conclude a treaty_: w. refl. dat,
_enter into a treaty_: pres. sg. III. gif him þonne Hreethric to hofum Geata
ge-þingeeth _(if H. enters into a treaty_ (seeks aid at?) _with the court of
the Geatas_, referring to the old German custom of princes entering the
service or suite of a foreign king), 1838. Leo.--2) _to prepare, appoint_:
pret. part. wiste [aet] þaem ahlaecan ... hilde ge-þinged, 648; hraethe waes ...
mece ge-þinged, 1939.

þingian, w. v.: 1) _to speak in an assembly, make an address_: inf. ne
hyrde ic snotor-licor on swa geongum feore guman þingian (_I never heard a
man so young speak so wisely_), 1844.--2) _to compound, settle, lay aside_:
inf. ne wolde feorh-bealo ... feo þingian (_would not compound the
life-bale for money_), 156; so, pret. sg. þa faehethe feo þingode, 470.

þihan. See þeon.

þin, possess, pron., _thy, thine_, 267, 346, 353, 367, 459, etc.

ge-þoht, st. m., _thought, plan_: acc. sg. an-fealdne ge-þoht, 256;
faest-raedne ge-þoht, 611.

þolian, w. v. w. acc.: 1) _to endure, bear_: inf. (inwid-sorge) þolian,
833; pres. sg. III. þrea-nyd þolaeth, 284; pret. sg. þolode þryethswyeth,
131.--2) _to hold out, stand, survive_: pres. sg. (intrans.) þenden þis
sweord þolaeth (_as long as this sword holds out_), 2500; pret. sg. (seo ecg)
þolode aer fela hand-gemota, 1526.

ge-þolian: 1) _to suffer, bear, endure_: gerund. to ge-þolianne, 1420;
pret. sg. earfoeth-lice þrage ge-þolode..., þaet he ... dream gehyrde (_bore
ill that he heard the sound of joy_), 87; torn ge-þolode (_bore the
misery_), 147.--2) _to have patience, wait_: inf. þaer he longe sceal on þaes
waldendes waere ge-þolian, 3110.

þon (Goth, þan) = _tum, then, now_, 504; aefter þon (_after that_), 725; aer
þon daeg cwome (_ere day came_), 732; no þon lange (_it was not long till
then_), 2424; naes þa long to þon (_it was not long till then_), 2592, 2846;
waes him se man to þon leof þaet ... _(the man was to that degree dear to him
that ..._), 1877.

þonne: 1) adv., _there, then, now_, 377, 435, 525, 1105, 1456, 1485, 1672,
1823, 3052, 3098(?).--2) conj., _if, when, while_: a) w. indic., 573, 881,
935, 1034, 1041, 1043, 1144, 1286, 1327, 1328, 1375, etc.; þaet ic
gum-cystum godne funde beaga bryttan, breac þonne moste (_that I found a
good ring-giver and enjoyed him whilst I could_), 1488. b) w. subj., 23,
1180, 3065; þonne ...þonne (_then ... when_), 484-85, 2447-48; gif þonne
...þonne (_if then ... then_), 1105-1107. c) _than_ after comparatives, 44,
248, 469, 505, 534, 679, 1140, 1183, etc.; a comparative must be supplied,
l. 70, before þone: þaet he ... hatan wolde medo-aern micel men ge-wyrcean
þone yldo bearn aefre ge-frunon (_a great mead-house_ (greater) _than men
had ever known_).

þracu, st. f., _strength, boldness_: in comp. mod-þracu; = impetus in
ecg-þracu.

þrag, st. f., _period of time, time_: nom. sg. þa hine sio þrag be-cwom
(_when the_ [battle]-_hour befell him_), 2884; acc. sg. þrage (_for a
time_), 87; longe (lange) þrage, 54, 114.--Comp. earfoeth-þrag.

ge-þraec, st. n., _multitude, crowd_: in comp. searo-ge-þraec.

þrec-wudu, st. m., (_might-wood_), _spear_ (cf. maegen-wudu): acc. sg.,
1247.

þrea, st. m. f., _misery, distress_: in comp. þeod-þrea, þrea-nedla, -nyd.

þrea-nedla, w. m., _crushing distress, misery_: dat. sg. for þrea-nedlan,
2225.

þrea-nyd, st. f., _oppression, distress_: acc. sg. þrea-nyd, 284; dat. pl.
þrea-nydum, 833.

þreat, st. m., _troop, band_: dat. sg. on þam þreate, 2407; dat. pl.
sceaethena þreatum, 4.--Comp. iren-þreat.

þreatian, w. v. w. acc., _to press, oppress_: pret. pl. mec ...þreatedon,
560.

þreot-teoetha, num. adj. w. m., _thirteenth_: nom. sg. þreot-teoetha secg,
2407.

þreo, num. (neut.), _three_: acc. þrio wicg, 2175; þreo hund wintra, 2279.

þridda, num. adj. w. m., _third_: instr. þriddan siethe, 2689.

ge-þring, st. n., _eddy, whirlpool, crush_: acc. on holma ge-þring, 2133.

þringan, st. v., _to press_: pret. sg. wergendra to lyt þrong ymbe þeoden
(_too few defenders pressed round the prince_), 2884; pret. pl. syethethan
Hreethlingas to hagan þrungon (_after the Hrethlingas had pressed into the
hedge_), 2961.

for-þringan, _to press out; rescue, protect_: inf. þaet he ne mehte ...þa
wea-lafe wige for-þringan þeodnes þegne (_that he could not rescue the
wretched remnant from the king's thane by war_), 1085.

ge-þringan, _to press_: pret. sg. ceol up geþrang (_the ship shot up_),
i.e. on the shore in landing), 1913.

þritig, num., _thirty_ (neut. subst.): acc. sg. w. partitive gen.: þritig
þegna, 123; gen. þrittiges (XXXtiges MS.) manna, 379.

þrist-hydig, adj., _bold-minded, valorous_: nom. sg. þioden þrist-hydig
(Beowulf), 2811.

þrowian, w. v. w. acc., _to suffer, endure_: inf. (hat, gnorn) þrowian,
2606, 2659; pret. sg. þrowade, 1590, 1722; þrowode, 2595.

þryeth, st. f., _abundance, multitude_, _excellence, power_: instr. pl.
þryethum (_excellently, extremely; excellent in strength?_), 494.

þryeth-aern, st. n., _excellent house, royal hall_: acc. sg. (of Heorot), 658.

þryethlic, adj., _excellent, chosen_: nom. sg. þryeth-lic þegna heap, 400,
1628; superl. acc. pl. þryeth-licost, 2870.

þryeth-swyeth, st. n.?, _great pain_ (?): acc., 131, 737 [? adj., _very
powerful, exceeding strong_].

þryeth-word, st. n., _bold speech, choice discourse_: nom. sg., 644. (Great
store was set by good table-talk: cf. Lachmann's Nibelunge, 1612; Rigsmal,
29, 7, in Moebius, p. 79b, 22.)

þrym, st. m.: 1) _power, might, force_: nom. sg. yetha þrym, 1919; instr. pl.
= adv. þrymmum (_powerfully_), 235.--2) _glory, renown_: acc. sg. þrym,
2.--Comp. hyge-þrym.

þrym-lic, adj., _powerful, mighty_: nom. sg. þrec-wudu þrym-lic (_the
mighty spear_), 1247.

þu, pron., _thou_, 366, 407, 445, etc.; acc. sg. þec (poetic), 948, 2152,
etc.; þe, 417, 426, 517, etc.; after compar. selran þe (_a better one than
thee_), 1851. See ge.

þunca, w. m. See aef-þunca.

ge-þungen. See ge-þingan, st. v.

þurfan, pret.-pres. v., _to need_: pres. sg. II. no þu ne þearft ...
sorgian (_needest not care_), 450; so, 445, 1675; III. ne þearf ...
onsittan (_need not fear_), 596; so, 2007, 2742; pres. subj. þaet he ...
secean þurfe, 2496; pret. sg. þorfte, 157, 1027, 1072, 2875, 2996; pl.
nealles Hetware hremge þorfton (i.e. wesan) feethe-wiges (_needed not boast
of their foot-fight_), 2365.

ge-þuren. See þweran.

þurh, prep. w. acc. signifying motion through, hence: I. local, _through,
throughout_: wod þa þurh þone wael-rec (_went then through the
battle-reek_), 2662.--II. causal: l) _on account of, for the sake of, owing
to_: þurh sliethne nieth (_through fierce hostility, heathenism_), 184; þurh
holdne hige (_from friendliness_), 267; so, þurh rumne sefan, 278; þurh
sidne sefan, 1727; eoweeth þurh egsan uncuethne nieth (_shows unheard-of
hostility by the terror he causes_), 276; so, 1102, 1336, 2046. 2) _by
means of, through_: heaetho-raes for-nam mihtig mere-deor þurh mine hand, 558;
þurh anes craeft, 700; so, 941, 1694, 1696, 1980, 2406, 3069.

þus, adv., _so, thus_, 238, 337, 430.

þunian, w. v., _to din, sound forth_: pret. sg. sund-wudu þunede, 1907.

þusend, num., _thousand_: 1) fem. acc. ic þe þusenda þegna bringe to helpe,
1830.--2) neut. with measure of value (sceat) omitted: acc. seofan þusendo,
2196; gen. hund-þusenda landes and locenra beaga (100,000 _sceattas' worth
of land and rings_), 2995.--3) uninflected: acc. þusend wintra, 3051.

þwaere, adj., _affable, mild_: in comp. man-þwaere.

ge-þwaere, adj., _gentle, mild_: nom. pl. ge-þwaere, 1231.

ge-þweran, st. v., _to forge, strike_: pret. part. heoru ... hamere
ge-þuren (for ge-þworen) (_hammer-forged sword_), 1286.

þyhtig. See þihtig.

ge-þyld (see þolian), st. f.: 1) _patience, endurance_: acc. sg. ge-þyld,
1396.--2) _steadfastness_: instr. pl. = adv.: ge-þyldum (_steadfastly,
patiently_), 1706.

þyle, st. m., _spokesman, leader of the conversation at court_: nom. sg.,
1166, 1457.

þyncan, þincean, w. v. w. dat. of pers., _to seem, appear_: pres. sg. III.
þinceeth him to lytel (_it seems to him too little_), 1749; ne þynceeth me
gerysne, þaet we _(it seemeth to me not fit that we_ ...), 2654; pres. pl.
hy ... wyrethe þinceaeth eorla ge-aehtlan (_they seem worthy contenders with_
(?) _earls_; or, _worthy warriors_), 368; pres. subj. swa him ge-met þince,
688; inf. þincean, 1342; pret. sg. þuhte, 2462, 3058; no his lif-gedal
sar-lic þuhte secga aenigum (_his death seemed painful to none of men_),
843; pret. pl. þaer him fold-wegas faegere þuhton, 867.

of-þincan, _to displease, offend_: inf. maeg þaes þonne of-þyncan þeoden
(dat.) Heaetho-beardna and þegna gehwam þara leoda, 2033.

þyrs, st. m., _giant_: dat. sg. wieth þyrse (Grendel), 426.

þys-lic, adj., _such, of such a nature_: nom. sg. fem. þys-licu þearf,
2638.

þy. See þaet.

þywan (M.H.G. diuhen, O.H.G. duhan), w. v., _to crush, oppress_: inf. gif
þec ymb-sittend egesan þywaeth (_if thy neighbors oppress thee with dread_),
1828.

þystru, st. f., _darkness_: dat. pl. in þystrum, 87.

ge-þywe, adj., _customary, usual_: nom. sg. swa him ge-þywe ne waes (_as was
not his custom_), 2333.


U

ufan, _adv., from above_, 1501; _above_, 330.

ufera (prop. _higher_), adj., _later_: dat. pl. ufaran dogrum, 2201, 2393.

ufor, adv., _higher_, 2952.

uhte, w. f., _twilight_ or _dawn_: dat. or acc. on uhtan, 126.

uht-floga, w. m., _twilight-flier, dawn-flier_ (epithet of the dragon):
gen. sg. uht-flogan, 2761.

uht-hlem, st. m., _twilight-cry, dawn-cry_: acc. sg., 2008.

uht-sceaetha, w. m., _twilight-_ or _dawn-foe_: nom. sg., 2272.

umbor, st. n., _child, infant_: acc. sg., 46; dat. sg., 1188.

un-bliethe, adv.(?), _unblithely, sorrowfully_, 130, 2269; (adj., nom. pl.?),
3032.

un-byrnende, pres. part., _unburning, without burning_, 2549.

unc, dat. and acc. of the dual wit, _us two, to us two_, 1784, 2138, 2527;
gen. hwaeether ... uncer twega (_which of us two_), 2533; uncer Grendles (_of
us two, G. and me_), 2003.

uncer, poss. pron., _of us two_: nom. sg. [uncer], 2002(?); dat. pl. uncran
eaferan, 1186.

un-cueth, adj.: 1) _unknown_: nom. sg. stig ... eldum uncueth, 2215; acc. sg.
neut. uncueth ge-lad (_unknown ways_), 1411.--2) _unheard-of, barbarous,
evil_: acc. sg. un-cuethne nieth, 276; gen. sg. un-cuethes (_of the foe_,
Grendel), 961.

under, I. prep. w. dat. and acc.: 1) w. dat., answering question where? =
_under_ (of rest), contrasted with _over_: bat (waes) under beorge, 211; þa
cwom Wealhþeo foreth gan under gyldnum beage (_W. walked forth under a golden
circlet_, i.e. decked with), 1164; siethethan he under segne sine ealgode
(_under his banner_), 1205; he under rande ge-cranc (_sank under his
shield_), 1210; under wolcnum, 8, 1632; under heofenum, 52, 505; under
roderum, 310; under helme, 342, 404; under here-griman, 396, 2050, 2606;
so, 711, 1198, 1303, 1929, 2204, 2416, 3061, 3104.--2) w. acc.: a)
answering question whither? = _under_ (of motion): þa secg wisode under
Heorotes hrof, 403; siethethan aefen-leoht under heofenes hador be-holen
weoretheeth, 414; under sceadu bregdan, 708; fleon under fen-hleoethu, 821; hond
alegde ... under geapne hrof, 837; teon in under eoderas, 1038; so, 1361,
1746, 2129, 2541, 2554, 2676, 2745; so, haefde þa for-siethod sunu Ecg-þeowes
under gynne grund, 1552 (for-siethian requires acc.). b) after verbs of
venturing and fighting, with acc. of object had in view: he under harne
stan ...ana ge-neethde frecne daede, 888; ne dorste under yetha ge-win aldre
ge-neethan, 1470. c) indicating extent, with acc. after expressions of limit,
etc.: under swegles begong (_as far as the sky extends_), 861, 1774; under
heofenes hwealf (_as far as heaven's vault reaches_), 2016.

II. Adv., _beneath, below_: stig under laeg (_a path lay beneath_, i.e. the
rock), 2214.

undern-mael, st. n., _midday_: acc. sg., 1429.

un-dyrne, un-derne, adj., _without concealment, plain, clear_: nom. sg.,
127, 2001; un-derne, 2912.

un-dyrne, adv., _plainly, evidently_; un-dyrne cueth, 150, 410.

un-faeger, adj., _unlovely, hideous_: nom. sg. leoht un-faeger, 728.

un-faecne, adj., _without malice, sincere_: nom. sg., 2069.

un-faege, adj., _not death-doomed_ or "_fey_": nom. sg., 2292; acc. sg.
un-faegne eorl, 573.

un-flitme, adv., _solemnly, incontestably_: Finn Hengeste elne unflitme
aethum benemde (_F. swore solemnly to H. with oaths_) [if an adj., elne un-f.
= _unconquerable in valor_], 1098.

un-forht, adj., _fearless, bold_: nom. sg., 287; acc. pl. unforhte (adv.?),
444. See Note.

un-from, adj., _unfit, unwarlike_: nom. sg., 2189.

un-frod, adj., _not aged, young_: dat sg. guman un-frodum, 2822.

un-gedefelice, adv., _unjustly, contrary to right and custom_, 2436.

un-gemete, adv., _immeasurably, exceedingly_, 2421, 2722, 2729.

un-gemetes, adv. gen. sg., the same, 1793.

un-geara, adv., (_not old_), _recently, lately_, 933; _soon_, 603.

un-gifeethe, adj., _not to be granted; refused_: nom. sg., 2922.

un-gleaw, adj., _regardless, reckless_: acc. sg. sweord ... ecgum ungleaw
(of a sharp-edged sword), 2565.

un-har, adj., _very gray_: nom. sg., 357; (_bald_?).

un-haelo, st. f., _mischief, destruction_: gen. sg. wiht un-haelo (_the demon
of destruction_, Grendel), 120.

un-heore, un-hyre, adj., _monstrous, horrible_: nom. sg. m., weard un-hiore
(the dragon), 2414; neut. wif un-hyre (Grendel's mother), 2121; nom. pl.
neut. hand-sporu ... unheoru (of Grendel's claws), 988.

un-hlytme, un-hlitme, adv. (cf. A.S. hlytm = _lot_; O.N. hluti = _part
division_), _undivided, unseparated_, _united_, 1130 [unless = un-flitme,
1098]. See Note.

un-leof, adj., _hated_: acc. pl. seah on un-leofe, 2864.

un-lifigende, pres. part., _unliving, lifeless_: nom. sg. un-lifigende,
468; acc. sg. un-lyfigendne, 1309; dat. sg. un-lifgendum, 1390; gen. sg.
un-lyfigendes, 745.

un-lytel, adj., _not little, very large_: nom. sg. dugueth un-lytel (_a great
band of warriors_? or _great joy_?), 498; dom un-lytel (_no little glory_),
886; acc. sg. torn un-lytel (_very great shame, misery_), 834.

un-murnlice, adv., _unpityingly, without sorrowing_, 449, 1757.

unnan, pret.-pres. v., _to grant, give; wish, will_: pret.-pres. sg. I. ic
þe an tela sinc-gestreona, 1226; weak pret. sg. I. uethe ic swiethor þaet þu
hine selfne ge-seon moste, 961; III. he ne uethe þaet ...(_he granted not that
..._), 503; him god uethe þaet ... he hyne sylfne ge-wraec (_God granted to him
that he avenged himself_), 2875; þeah he uethe wel (_though he well would_),
2856.

ge-unnan, _to grant, permit_: inf. gif he us ge-unnan wile þaet we hine ...
gretan moton, 346; me ge-uethe ylda waldend, þaet ic ... ge-seah hangian (_the
Ruler of men permitted me to see hanging ..._), 1662.

un-nyt, adj., _useless_: nom. sg., 413, 3170.

un-riht, st. n., _unright, injustice, wrong_: acc. sg. unriht, 1255, 2740;
instr. sg. un-rihte (_unjustly, wrongly_), 3060.

un-rim, st. n., _immense number_: nom. sg., 1239, 3136; acc. sg., 2625.

un-rime, adj., _countless, measureless_: nom. sg. gold un-rime, 3013.

un-rot, adj., _sorrowing_: nom. pl. un-rote, 3149.

un-snyttru, st. f., _lack of wisdom_: dat. pl. for his un-snyttrum (_for
his unwisdom_), 1735.

un-softe, adv., _unsoftly, with violence_ (_hardly_?), 2141; _scarcely_,
1656.

un-swyethe, adv., _not strongly_ or _powerfully_: compar. (ecg) bat unswiethor
þonne his þiod-cyning þearfe haefde (_the sword bit less sharply than the
prince of the people needed_), 2579; fyr unswiethor weoll, 2882.

un-synnig, adj., _guiltless, sinless_: acc. sg. un-synnigne, 2090.

un-synnum, adv. instr. pl., _guiltlessly_, 1073.

un-taele, adj., _blameless_: acc. pl. un-taele, 1866.

un-tyder, st. m., _evil race, monster_: nom. pl. un-tydras, 111. [Cf. Ger.
un-mensch.]

un-waclic, adj., _that cannot be shaken; firm, strong_: acc. sg. ad ...
un-waclicne, 3139.

un-wearnum, adv. instr. pl., _unawares, suddenly_; (_unresistingly_?), 742.

un-wrecen, pret. part., _unavenged_, 2444.

up, adv., _up, upward_, 224, 519, 1374, 1620, 1913, 1921, 2894; (of the
voice), þa waes ... wop up ahafen, 128; so, 783.

up-lang, adj., _upright, erect_: nom. sg., 760.

uppe (adj., ufe, uffe), adv., _above_, 566.

up-riht, adj., _upright, erect_: nom. sg., 2093.

uton. See wuton.


U

ueth-genge, adj., _transitory, evanescent, ready to depart_, (_fled_?): þaer
waes Aesc-here ... feorh ueth-genge, 2124.

us, pers. pron. dat. and acc. of we (see we), _us, to us_, 1822, 2636,
2643, 2921, 3002, 3079; acc. (poetic), usic, 2639, 2641, 2642;--gen. ure:
ure aeg-hwylc (_each of us_), 1387; user, 2075.

user, possess, pron.: nom. sg. ure man-drihten, 2648; dat. sg. ussum
hlaforde, 2635; gen. sg. neut. usses cynnes, 2814; dat. pl. urum ... bam
(_to us both, two_) (for unc bam), 2660.

ut, adv., _out_, 215, 537, 664, 1293, 1584, 2082, 2558, 3131.

utan, adv., _from without, without_, 775, 1032, 1504, 2335.

ut-fus, adj., _ready to go_: nom. sg. hringed-stefna isig and ut-fus, 33.

ut-weard, adj., _outward, outside, free_: nom. sg. eoten (Grendel) waes
ut-weard, 762.

utan-weard, adj., _without, outward, from without_: acc. sg. hlaew ... ealne
utan-weardne, 2298.


W

*wacan, st. v., _to awake, arise, originate_: pret. sg. þanon (from Cain)
woc fela geo-sceaft-gasta, 1266; so, 1961; pl. þam feower bearn ... in
worold wocun, 60.

*on-wacan: 1) _to awake_ (intrans.): pret. sg. þa se wyrm on-woc (_when the
drake awoke_), 2288.--2) _to be born_: pret. sg. him on-woc heah Healfdene,
56; pl. on-wocon, 111.

wacian, w. v., _to watch_: imper. sg. waca wieth wraethum! 661.

wadan, st. v., (cf. wade, waddle) _to traverse; stride, go_: pret. sg. wod
þurh þone wael-rec, 2662; wod under wolcnum (_stalked beneath the clouds_),
715.

ge-wadan, _to attain by moving, come to, reach_: pret. part. oeth þaet ...
wunden-stefna ge-waden haefde, þaet þa liethende land ge-sawon (_till the ship
had gone so far that the sailors saw land_), 220.

on-wadan, w. acc., _to invade, befall_: pret. sg. hine fyren on-wod(?),
916.

þurh-wadan, _to penetrate, pierce_: pret. sg. þaet swurd þurh-wod wraet-licne
wyrm, 891; so, 1568.

wag, st. m., _wall_: dat. sg. on wage, 1663; dat. pl. aefter wagum (_along
the walls_), 996.

wala, w. m., _boss_: nom. pl. walan, 1032 (cf. Bouterwek in Haupt XI., 85
seqq.).

walda, w. m., _wielder, ruler_: in comp. an-, eal-walda.

wald-swaethu, st. f., _forest-path_: dat. pl. aefter wald-swaethum (_along the
wood-paths_), 1404.

wam, wom, st. m., _spot, blot, sin_: acc. sg. him be-beorgan ne con wom
(_cannot protect himself from evil_ or _from the evil strange orders_,
etc.; wom = wogum? = _crooked_?), 1748; instr. pl. wommum, 3074.

wan, won, adj., _wan, lurid, dark_: nom. sg, yeth-geblond ... won (_the dark
waves_), 1375; se wonna hrefn (_the black raven_), 3025; wonna leg (_lurid
flame_), 3116; dat. sg. f. on wanre niht, 703; nom. pl. neut. scadu-helma
ge-sceapu ... wan, 652.

wang, st. m., _mead, field; place_: acc. sg. wang, 93, 225; wong, 1414,
2410, 3074; dat. sg. wange, 2004; wonge, 2243, 3040; acc. pl. wongas,
2463.--Comp.: freoetho-, grund-, medo-, sae-wang.

wang-stede, st. m., (locus campestris), _spot, place_: dat. sg. wong-stede,
2787.

wan-hyd (for hygd), st. f., _heedlessness, recklessness_: dat. pl. for his
won-hydum, 434.

wanian, w. v.: 1) intrans., _to decrease, wane_: inf. þa þaet sweord ongan
... wanian, 1608.--2) w. acc., _to cause to wane_ or _lessen_: pret. sg. he
to lange leode mine wanode, 1338.

ge-wanian, _to decrease, diminish_: pret. part. is min flet-werod ...
ge-wanod, 477.

wan-saelig, adj., _unhappy, wretched_: nom. sg. won-saelig wer (Grendel),
105.

wan-sceaft, st. f., _misery, want_: acc. sg. won-sceaft, 120.

warian, w. v. w. acc., _to occupy, guard, possess_: pres. sg. III. þaer he
haeethen gold waraeth (_where he guards heathen gold_), 2278; pl. III. hie
(Grendel and his mother) dygel land warigeaeth, 1359; pret. sg. (Grendel)
goldsele warode, 1254; (Cain) westen warode, 1266.

waroeth, st. m., _shore_: dat. sg. to waroethe, 234; acc. pl. wide waroethas,
1966.

waru, st. f., _inhabitants_, (collective) _population_: in comp. land-waru.

wa, interj., _woe!_ wa bieth þaem þe... (_woe to him that..._), 183.

waethu, st. f., _way, journey_: in comp. gamen-waethu.

wanian, w. v., _to weep, whine, howl_, w. acc.: inf. gehyrdon ... sar
wanigean helle haeftan (_they heard the hell-fastened one lamenting his
pain_), 788; pret. sg. [wanode], 3152(?).

wat. See witan.

waecean, w. v., _to watch_: pret. part waeccende, 709, 2842; acc. sg. m.
waeccendne wer, 1269. See wacian.

waecnan, w. v., _to be awake, come forth_: inf., 85.

waed, st. n., (the moving) _sea, ocean_: nom. wado weallende, 546; wadu
weallendu, 581; gen. pl. wada 508.

waefre, adj., _wavering_ (like flame), _ghostlike, without distinct bodily
form_: nom. sg. wael-gaest waefre (of Grendel's mother), 1332;--_flickering,
expiring_: nom. sg. waefre mod, 1151; him waes geomor sefa, waefre and
wael-fus, 2421.

be-waegnan, w. v., _to offer_: pret part, him waes ... freond-laethu wordum
be-waegned, 1194.

wael, st. n., _battle, slaughter, the slain in battle_: acc. sg. wael, 1213,
3028, blodig wael, 448; oethethe on wael crunge (_or in battle, among the slain,
fall_), 636; dat. sg. sume on waele crungon (_some fell in the slaughter_),
1114; dat. sg. in Fr...es waele (proper name in MS. destroyed), 1071; nom.
pl. walu, 1043.

wael-bed, st. n., _slaughter-bed, deathbed_: dat. sg. on wael-bedde, 965.

wael-bend, st. f., _death-bond_: acc. sg. or pl. wael-bende ...
hand-gewriethene, 1937.

wael-bleat, adj., _deadly, mortal, cruel_: acc. sg. wunde wael-bleate, 2726.

wael-deaeth, st. m., _death in battle_: nom. sg., 696.

wael-dreor, st. m., _battle-gore_: instr. sg. wael-dreore, 1632.

wael-fah, adj., _slaughter-stained, blood-stained_: acc. sg. wael-fagne
winter, 1129.

wael-faeheth, st. f., _deadly feud_: gen. pl. wael-faehetha, 2029.

wael-feall, st. m., _(fall of the slain), death, destruction_: dat. sg. to
wael-fealle, 1712.

wael-fus, adj., _ready for death, foreboding death_: nom. sg., 2421.

wael-fyllo, st. f., _fill of slaughter_: dat. sg. mid þaere wael-fulle (i.e.
the thirty men nightly slaughtered at Heorot by Grendel), 125; wael-fylla?
3155.

wael-fyr, st. n.: 1) _deadly fire_: instr. sg. wael-fyre (of the fire-spewing
dragon), 2583.--2) _corpse-consuming fire, funeral pyre_: gen. pl. wael-fyra
maest, 1120.

wael-gaest, st. m., _deadly sprite_ (of Grendel and his mother): nom. sg.
wael-gaest, 1332; acc. sg. þone wael-gaest, 1996.

wael-hlem, st. m., _death-stroke_: acc. sg. wael-hlem þone, 1996.

waelm, st. m., _flood, whelming water_: nom. sg. þaere burnan waelm, 2547;
gen. sg. þaes waelmes (_of the surf_), 2136.--Comp. cear-waelm.

wael-nieth, st. m., _deadly hostility_: nom. sg., 3001; dat. sg. aefter
wael-niethe, 85; nom. pl. wael-niethas, 2066.

wael-rap, st. m., _flood-fetter, i.e. ice_: acc. pl. wael-rapas, 1611; (cf.
waell, wel, wyll = _well, flood_: leax sceal on waele mid sceote scriethan,
Gnom. Cott. 39).

wael-raes, st. m., _deadly onslaught_: nom. sg., 2948; dat. sg. wael-raese,
825, 2532.

wael-rest, st. f., _death-bed_, acc. sg. wael-reste, 2903.

wael-rec, st. m., _deadly reek_ or _smoke_: acc. sg. wod þa þurh þone
wael-rec, 2662.

wael-reaf, st, n., _booty of the slain, battle-plunder_: acc. sg., 1206.

wael-reow, adj., _bold in battle_: nom. sg., 630.

wael-sceaft, st. m., _deadly shaft, spear_: acc. pl. wael-sceaftas, 398.

wael-seax, st. n., _deadly knife, war-knife_: instr. sg. waell-seaxe, 2704.

wael-stenge, st. m., _battle-spear_: dat. sg. on þam wael-stenge, 1639.

wael-stow, st. f., _battle-field_: dat. sg. wael-stowe, 2052, 2985.

waestm, st. m., _growth, form, figure_: dat. sg. on weres waestmum (_in man's
form_), 1353.

waeter, st. n., _water_: nom. sg., 93, 1417, 1515, 1632; acc. sg. waeter,
1365, 1620; deop waeter (_the deep_), 509, 1905; ofer wid waeter (_over the
high sea]_, 2474; dat. sg. aefter waetere _(along the Grendel-sea_), 1426;
under waetere (_at the bottom of the sea_), 1657; instr. waetere, 2723;
waetre, 2855; gen. sg. ofer waeteres hrycg (_over the surface of the sea_),
471; on waeteres aeht, 516; þurh waeteres wylm (_through the sea-wave_), 1694;
gen. = instr. waeteres weorpan (_to sprinkle with water_), 2792.

waeter-egesa, st. m., _water-terror_, i.e. _the fearful sea_: acc. sg., 1261

waeter-yeth, st. f., _water-wave, billow_: dat. pl. waeter-yethum, 2243.

waed, st. f., _(weeds), garment_: in comp. here-, hilde-waed.

ge-waede, st. n., _clothing_, especially _battle-equipments_: acc. pl.
gewaedu, 292.--Comp. eorl-gewaede.

waeg, st. m., _wave_: acc. sg. waeg, 3133.

waeg-bora, w. m., _wave-bearer, swimmer_ (bearing or propelling the waves
before him): nom. sg. wundorlic waeg-bora (of a sea-monster), 1441.

waeg-flota, w. m., _sea-sailer, ship_: acc. sg. weg-flotan, 1908.

waeg-holm, st. m., _the wave-filled sea_: acc. sg. ofer waeg-holm, 217.

waege, st. n., _cup, can_: acc. sg. faeted waege, 2254, 2283.--Comp.: ealo-,
lieth-waege.

waeg-liethend, pres. part., _sea-farer_: dat. pl. waeg-liethendum (et liethendum,
MS.), 3160.

waeg-sweord, st. n., _heavy sword_: acc. sg., 1490.

waen, st. m., _wain, wagon_: acc. sg. on waen, 3135.

waepen, st. n., _weapon; sword_: nom. sg., 1661; acc. sg. waepen, 686, 1574,
2520, 2688; instr. waepne, 1665, 2966; gen. waepnes, 1468; acc. pl. waepen,
292; dat. pl. waepnum, 250, 331, 2039, 2396. --Comp.: hilde-, sige-waepen.

waepned-man, st. m., _warrior, man_: dat. sg. waepned-men, 1285.

waer, st. f., _covenant, treaty_: acc. sg. waere, 1101;--_protection, care_:
dat. sg. on frean (on þaes waldendes) waere (_into God's protection_), 27,
3110.--Comp.: frioetho-waer.

waesma, w. m., _fierce strength, war-strength_: in comp. here-waesma, 678.

we, pers. pron., _we_, 942, 959, 1327, 1653, 1819, 1820, etc.

web, st. n., _woven work, tapestry_:, nom. pl. web, 996.

webbe, w. f., _webster, female weaver_: in comp. freoethu-webbe.

weccan, weccean, w. v. w. acc., _to wake, rouse; recall_: inf. wig-bealu
weccan (_to stir up strife_), 2047; nalles hearpan sweg (sceal) wigend
weccean (_the sound of the harp shall not wake up the warriors_), 3025;
ongunnon þa ... bael-fyra maest wigend weccan (_the warriors then began to
start the mightiest of funeral pyres_), 3145; pret. sg. wehte hine waetre
(_roused him with water_, i.e. Wiglaf recalled Beowulf to consciousness),
2855.

to-weccan, _to stir up, rouse_: pret, pl. hu þa folc mid him (_with one
another_), faehethe to-wehton, 2949.

wed, st. n., (cf. wed-ding), _pledge_: dat. sg. hyldo to wedde (_as a
pledge of his favor_), 2999.

weder, st. n., _weather_: acc. pl. wuldor-torhtan weder, 1137; gen. pl.
wedera cealdost, 546.

ge-wef, st. n., _woof, weaving_: acc. pl. wig-speda ge-wiofu (_the woof of
war-speed_: the battle-woof woven for weal or woe by the Walkyries; cf.
Njals-saga, 158), 698.

weg, st. m., _way_: acc. sg. on weg (_away, off_), 264, 764, 845, 1431,
2097; gyf þu on weg cymest (_if thou comest off safe_, i.e. from the battle
with Grendel's mother), 1383.--Comp.: feor-, fold-, foreth-, wid-weg.

wegan, st. v. w. acc., _to bear, wear, bring, possess_: subj. pres. nah hwa
sweord wege (_I have none that may bear the sword_), 2253; inf. nalles
(sceal) eorl wegan maethethum to ge-myndum (_no earl shall wear a memorial
jewel_), 3016; pret. ind. he þa fraetwe waeg ... ofer yetha ful (_bore the
jewels over the goblet of the waves_), 1208; wael-seaxe ... þaet he on byrnan
waeg, 2705; heortan sorge waeg (_bore heart's sorrow_); so, 152, 1778, 1932,
2781.

aet-wegan = _auferre, to carry off_: syethethan Hama aet-waeg to þaere byrhtan
byrig Brosinga mene (_since H. bore from the bright city the
Brosing-collar_), 1199.

ge-wegan (O.N. wega), _to fight_: inf. þe he wieth þam wyrme ge-wegan
sceolde, 2401.

wel, adv.: 1) _well_: wel bieth þaem þe ... (_well for him that ...!_), 186;
se þe wel þenceeth (_he that well thinketh, judgeth_), 289; so, 640, 1046,
1822, 1834, 1952, 2602; well, 2163, 2813.--2) _very, very much_: Geat
ungemetes wel ... restan lyste (_the Geat longed sorely to rest_),
1793.--3) _indeed, to be sure_, 2571, 2856.

wela, w. m., _wealth, goods, possessions_: in comp. aer-, burg-, hord-,
maethethum-wela.

wel-hwylc, indef. pron., = quivis, _any you please, any_ (each, all): gen.
pl. wel-hwylcra wilna, 1345; w. partitive gen.: nom. sg. witena wel-hwylc,
266;--substantively: acc. neut. wel-hwylc, 875.

welig, adj., _wealthy, rich_: acc. sg. wic-stede weligne Waegmundinga, 2608.

wel-þungen, pres. part., _well-thriven_ (in mind), _mature, high-minded_:
nom. sg. Hygd (waes) swiethe geong, wis, wel-þungen, 1928.

wenian, w. v., _to accustom, attract, honor_: subj. pret. þaet ...
Folcwaldan sunu ... Hengestes heap hringum wenede (_sh. honor_), 1092.

be-(bi-)wenian, _entertain, care for, attend_: pret. sg. maeg þaes þonne
of-þyncan þeoden Heaetho-beardna ... þonne he mid faemnan on flet gaeeth,
dryht-bearn Dena duguetha bi-wenede (_may well displease the prince of the
H.... when he with the woman goes into the hall, that a noble scion of the
Danes should entertain, bear wine to, the knights_, cf. 494 seqq.; or, _a
noble scion of the Danes should attend on her?_), 2036; pret. part. nom.
pl. waeron her tela willum be-wenede, 1822.

wendan, w. v., _to turn_: pres. sg. III. him eal worold wendeeth on willan
(_all the world turns at his will_), 1740.

ge-wendan, w. acc.: l) _to turn, turn round_: pret. sg. wicg gewende
(_turned his horse_), 315.--2) _to turn_ (intrans.), _change_: inf. wa bieth
þaem þe sceal ... frofre ne wenan, wihte ge-wendan (_woe to him that shall
have no hope, shall not change at all_), 186.

on-wendan, _to avert, set aside_: 1) w. acc.: inf. ne mihte snotor haeleeth
wean on-wendan, 191.--2) intrans.: sibb aefre ne maeg wiht on-wendan þam þe
wel þenceeth (_in, to, him that is well thinking friendship can not be set
aside_), 2602.

wer, st. m., _man, hero_: nom. sg. (Grendel), 105; acc. sg. wer (Beowulf),
1269, 3174; gen. sg. on weres waestmum (_in man's form_), 1353; nom. pl.
weras, 216, 1223, 1234, 1441, 1651; dat. pl. werum, 1257; gen. pl. wera,
120, 994, 1732, 3001; (MS. weora), 2948.

wered, st. n., (as adj. = _sweet_), _a sort of beer_ (probably without hops
or such ingredients): acc. sg. scir wered, 496.

were-feohte, f., _defensive fight, fight in self-defence_: dat. pl. for
were-fyhtum (fere fyhtum, MS.), 457.

werhetho, st. f., _curse, outlawry, condemnation_: acc. sg. þu in helle
scealt werhetho dreogan, 590.

werian, _to defend, protect_: w. vb., pres. sg. III. beaduscruda ... þaet
mine breost wereeth, 453; inf. wit unc wieth hron-fixas werian þohton, 541;
pres. part. w. gen. pl. wergendra to lyt (_too few defenders_), 2883; pret.
ind. wael-reaf werede (_guarded the battle-spoil_), 1206; se hwita helm
hafelan werede (_the shining helm protected his head_), 1449; pl. hafelan
weredon, 1328; pret. part. nom. pl. ge ... byrnum werede (_ye_ ...
_corselet-clad_), 238, 2530.

be-werian, _to protect, defend_: pret. pl. þaet hie ... leoda land-geweorc
laethum be-weredon scuccum and scinnum (_that they the people's land-work
from foes, from monsters and demons, might defend_), 939

werig, adj., _accursed, outlawed_: gen. sg. wergan gastes (Grendel), 133;
(of the devil), 1748.

werod, weorod, st. n., _band of men, warrior-troop_: nom. sg. werod, 652;
weorod, 290, 2015, 3031; acc. sg. werod, 319; dat. instr. sg. weorode,
1012, 2347; werede, 1216; gen. sg. werodes, 259; gen. pl. wereda, 2187;
weoroda, 60.--Comp.: eorl-, flet-werod.

wer-þeod, st. f., _people, humanity_: dat. sg. ofer wer-þeode, 900.

wesan, v., _to be_: pres. sg. I. ic eom, 335, 407; II. þu eart, 352, 506;
III. is, 256, 272, 316, 343, 375, 473, etc.; nu is þines maegenes blaed ane
hwile (_the prime [fame?] of thy powers lasteth now for a while_), 1762;
ys, 2911, 3000, 3085; pl. I. we synt, 260, 342; II. syndon, 237, 393; III.
syndon, 257, 361, 1231; synt, 364; sint, 388; subj. pres. sie, 435, 683,
etc.; sy, 1832, etc.; sig, 1779, etc.; imper. sg. II. wes, 269 (cf.
wassail, wes hael), 407, 1171, 1220, 1225, etc.; inf. wesan, 272, 1329,
1860, 2709, etc. The inf. wesan must sometimes be supplied: nealles Hetware
hremge þorfton (i.e. wesan) feethe-wiges, 2364; so, 2498, 2660, 618, 1858;
pres. part. wesende, 46; dat. sg. wesendum, 1188; pret. sg. I., III. waes,
11, 12, 18, 36, 49, 53, etc.; waes on sunde (_was a-swimming_), 1619; so,
848, 850(?), 970, 981, 1293; progressive, waes secgende (for saede), 3029;
II. waere, 1479, etc.; pl. waeron, 233, 536, 544, etc.; waeran (w. reflex,
him), 2476; pret. subj. waere, 173, 203, 594, 946, etc.; progressive,
myndgiend waere (for myndgie), 1106.--Contracted neg. forms: , nis = ne +
is, 249, 1373, etc.; naes = ne + waes, 134, 1300, 1922, 2193, etc. (cf.
uncontracted: ne waes, 890, 1472); naeron = ne + waeron, 2658; naere = ne +
waere, 861, 1168. See cniht-wesende.

weg. See waeg.

wen, st. f., _expectation, hope_: nom. sg., 735, 1874, 2324; nu is leodum
wen orleg-hwile (gen.) (_now the people have weening of a time of strife_),
2911; acc. sg. þaes ic wen haebbe (_as I hope, expect_), 383; so, þaes þe ic
[wen] hafo, 3001; wen ic talige, 1846; dat. pl. bega on wenum _(in
expectation of both_, i.e. the death and the return of Beowulf), 2896. See
or-wena.

wenan, w. v., _to ween, expect, hope_: 1) absolutely; pres. sg. I. þaes ic
wene (_as I hope_), 272; swa ic þe wene to _(as I hope thou wilt_: Beowulf
hopes Hroethgar will now suffer no more pain), 1397.--2) w. gen. or acc.
pres. sg. I. þonne wene ic to þe wyrsan ge-þinges, 525; ic þaer heaethu-fyres
hates wene, 2523; III. secce ne weneeth to Gar Denum (_weeneth not of contest
with the Gar-Danes_), 601; inf. (beorhtre bote) wenan (_to expect, count
on, a brilliant_ [? _a lighter penalty_] _atonement_), 157; pret. pl. þaes
ne wendon aer witan Scyldinga þaet ... _the wise men of the Scyldings weened
not of this before, that_...), 779; þaet hig þaes aeethelinges eft ne wendon þaet
he ... secean come _(that they looked not for the atheling again that he_
... _would come to seek_ ...), 1598.--3) w. acc. inf.: pret. sg. wende,
934.--4) w. depend, clause: pres. sg. I. wene ic þaet..., 1185; wen' ic
þaet..., 338, 442; pret. sg. wende, 2330; pl. wendon, 938, 1605.

wepan, st. v., _to weep_: pret. sg. [weop], 3152 (?).

werig, adj., _weary, exhausted_, w. gen.: nom. sg. siethes werig (_weary from
the journey, way-weary_), 579; dat. sg. siethes wergum, 1795;--w. instr.:
acc. pl. wundum werge _(wound-weary_), 2938.--Comp.: deaeth-, fyl-,
gueth-werig.

ge-werigean, w. v., _to weary, exhaust_: pret. part. ge-wergad, 2853.

werig-mod, adj., _weary-minded (animo defessus)_: nom. sg., 845, 1544.

weste, adj., _waste, uninhabited_: acc. sg. win-sele westne, 2457.

westen, st. n., _waste, wilderness_: acc. sg. westen, 1266.

westen, st. f., _waste, wilderness_: dat. sg. on þaere westenne, 2299.

weal, st. m.: 1 _wall, rampart_: dat. instr. sg. wealle, 786, 892, 3163;
gen. sg. wealles, 2308.--2) _elevated sea-shore_: dat. sg. of wealle, 229;
acc. pl. windige weallas, 572, 1225.--3) _wall of a building_: acc, sg. wieth
þaes recedes weal, 326; dat. sg. be wealle, 1574; hence, the inner and outer
rock-walls of the dragon's lair (cf. Heyne's essay: Halle Heorot, p. 59):
dat. sg., 2308, 2527, 2717, 2760, 3061, 3104; gen. sg. wealles,
2324.--Comp.: bord-, eoreth-, sae-, scyld-weal.

ge-wealc, st. n., _rolling_: acc. sg. ofer yetha ge-wealc, 464.

ge-weald, st. n., _power, might_: acc. sg. on feonda ge-weald _(into the
power of his foes_), 809, 904; so, 1685; geweald agan, haebban, a-beodan (w.
gen. of object = _to present) = to have power over_, 79, 655, 765, 951,
1088, 1611, 1728. See on-weald.

wealdan, st. v., _to wield, govern, rule over, prevail_: 1) absolutely or
with depend, clause: inf. gif he wealdan mot (_if he may prevail_), 442;
þaer he ... wealdan moste swa him Wyrd ne ge-scraf (_if [where?] he was to
prevail, as Weird had not destined for him_), 2575; pres. part. waldend
(_God_), 1694; dat. wealdende, 2330; gen. waldendes, 2293, 2858, 3110.--2)
with instr. or dat.: inf. þam waepnum wealdan (_to wield, prevail with, the
weapons_), 2039; Geatum wealdan (_to rule the Geatas_), 2391; þeah-hordum
wealdan (_to rule over, control, the treasure of rings_), 2828; wael-stowe
wealdan (_to hold the field of battle_), 2985; pret. sg. weold, 465, 1058,
2380, 2596; þenden wordum weold wine Scyldinga (_while the friend of the S.
ruled the G._), 30; pl. weoldon, 2052.--3) with gen.: pres. sg. I. þenden
ic wealde widan rices, 1860; pres. part. wuldres wealdend(waldend), 17,
183, 1753; weard, 2514; the _'dragon_ is called ylda waldend, 1662; waldend
fira, 2742; sigora waldend, 2876 (designations of God); pret. sg. weold,
703, 1771.

ge-wealdan, _to wield, have power over, arrange_: 1) w. acc.: pret. sg.
halig god ge-weold wig-sigor, 1555.--2) w. dat.: pret. cyning ge-weold his
ge-witte (_the king possessed his senses_), 2704.--3) w. gen.: inf. he ne
mihte no ... waepna ge-wealdan, 1510.

ge-wealden, pret. part., _subject, subjected_: acc. pl. gedeeth him swa
gewealdene worolde daelas, 1733.

weallan, st. v.: 1) _to toss, be agitated_ (of the sea): pres. part. nom.
pl. wadu weallende (weallendu), 546, 581; nom. sg. brim weallende, 848;
pret. ind. weol, 515, 850, 1132; weoll, 2139.--2) figuratively (of
emotions), _to be agitated_: pres. pl. III. syethethan Ingelde weallaeth
wael-niethas (_deadly hate thus agitates Ingeld_), 2066; pres. part.
weallende, 2465; pret. sg. hreether inne weoll (_his heart was moved within
him_), 2114; hreether aeethme weoll (_his breast_ [the dragon's] _swelled from
breathing, snorting_), 2594; breost innan weoll þeostrum ge-þoncum, 2332;
so, weoll, 2600, 2715, 2883.

weall-clif, st. n., _sea-cliff_: acc. sg. ofer weall-clif, 3133.

weallian, w. v., _to wander, rove about_: pres. part. in comp.
heoro-weallende, 2782.

weard, st. m., _warden, guardian; owner_: nom. sg. weard Scyldinga (_the
Scyldings' warden of the march_), 229; weard, 286, 2240; se weard, sawele
hyrde, 1742; the _king_ is called beah-horda weard, 922; rices weard, 1391;
folces weard, 2514; the _dragon_ is called weard, 3061; weard un-hiore,
2414; beorges weard, 2581; acc. sg, weard, 669; (dragon), 2842; beorges
weard (dragon), 2525, 3067.--Comp.: bat-, eethel-, gold-, heafod-, hord-,
hyeth-, land-, ren-, sele-, yrfe-weard.

weard, st. m., _possession_ (Dietrich in Haupt XI., 415): in comp.
eoreth-weard, 2335.

weard, st. f., _watch, ward_: acc. sg. wearde healdan, 319; wearde heold,
305.--Comp. aeg-weard.

weard, adj., _-ward_: in comp. and-, innan-, ut-weard, 1288, etc.

weardian, w. v. w. acc.: 1) _to watch, guard, keep_: inf. he his folme
forlet to lif-wraethe, last weardian (_Grendel left his hand behind as a
life-saver, to guard his track_ [Kemble]), 972; pret. sg. him sio swiethre
swaethe weardade hand on Hiorte (_his right hand kept guard for him in H._,
i.e. showed that he had been there), 2099; sg. for pl. hyrde ic þaet þam
fraetwum feower mearas lungre gelice last weardode (_I heard that four
horses, quite alike, followed in the traces of the armor_), 2165.--2) _to
hold, possess, inhabit_: pret. sg. fifel-cynnes eard ... weardode (_dwelt
in the abode of the sea-fiends_), 105; reced weardode un-rim eorla (_an
immense number of earls held the hall_), 1238; pl. þaer we gesunde sael
weardodon, 2076.

wearh, st. m., _the accursed one; wolf_: in comp. heoro-wearg, 1268.

wearn, st. f.: 1) _resistance, refusal_, 366.--2) _warning?, resistance?_
See un-wearnum, 742.

weaxan, st. v., _to wax, grow_: pres. sg. III. oeth þaet him on innan
ofer-hygda dael weaxeeth (_till within him pride waxeth_), 1742; inf. weaxan,
3116; pret. sg. weox, 8.

ge-weaxan, _to grow up_: pret. sg. oft þaet seo geogoeth ge-weox, 66.

ge-weaxan to, _to grow to_ or _for something_: pret. sg. ne ge-weox he him
to willan (_grew not for their benefit_), 1712.

wea, w. m., _woe, evil, misfortune_: nom. sg., 937; acc. sg. wean, 191,
423, 1207, 1992, 2293, 2938; gen. pl. weana, 148, 934, 1151, 1397.

wea-laf, st. f., _wretched remnant_: acc. pl. þa wea-lafe (_the wretched
remnant_, i.e. Finn's almost annihilated band), 1085, 1099.

wea-spel, st. n., _woe-spell, evil tidings_: dat. sg. wea-spelle, 1316.

ge-weoldum. See ge-wild.

weorc, st. n.: 1) _work, labor, deed_: acc. sg., 74; (_war-deed_), 1657;
instr. sg. weorce, 1570; dat. pl. weorcum, 2097; wordum ne (and) worcum,
1101, 1834; gen. pl. worda and worca, 289.--2) _work, trouble, suffering_:
acc. sg. þaes gewinnes weorc (_misery on account of this strife_), 1722;
dat. pl. adv. weorcum (_with labor_), 1639.--Comp.: baedo-, ellen-, heaetho-,
niht-weorc.

ge-weorc, st. n.: 1) _work, deed, labor_: nom. acc. sg., 455, 1563, 1682,
2718, 2775; gen. sg. ge-weorces, 2712. Comp.: aer-, fyrn-, gueth-, hond-,
nieth-ge-weorc.--2) _fortification, rampart_: in comp. land-geweorc, 939.

weorce, adj., _painful, bitter_: nom. sg., 1419.

weoreth, st. n., _precious object, valuable_: dat. sg. weorethe, 2497.

weoreth, adj., _dear, precious_: nom. sg. weoreth Denum aeetheling (_the atheling
dear to the Danes_, Beowulf), 1815; compar. nom. sg. þaet he syethethan waes ...
maethme þy weorethra (_more honored from the jewel_), 1903; cf. wyrethe.

weorethan, st. v.: 1) _to become_: pres. sg. III. beholen weoretheeth (_is
concealed_), 414; underne weoretheeth (_becomes known_), 2914; so, pl. III.
weorethaeth, 2067; wurethaeth, 282; inf. weorethan, 3179; wurethan, 808; pret. sg. I.,
III. weareth, 6, 77, 149, 409, 555, 754, 768, 819, 824, etc.; pl. wurdon,
228; subj. pret. wurde, 2732.--2) inf. to frofre weorethan (_to become a
help_), 1708; pret. sg. weareth he Heaetholafe to hand-bonan, 460; so, weareth,
906, 1262; ne weareth Heremod swa (i.e. to frofre) eaforum Ecgwelan, 1710;
pl. wurdon, 2204; subj. pret. sg. II. wurde, 588.--3) pret. sg. þaet he on
fylle weareth (_that he came to a fall_), 1545.--4) _to happen, befall_: inf.
unc sceal weorethan ... swa unc Wyrd ge-teoeth (_it shall befall us two as Fate
decrees_), 2527; þurh hwaet his worulde gedal weorethan sceolde, 3069; pret.
sg. þa þaer sona weareth ed-hwyrft eorlum (_there was soon a renewal to the
earls_, i.e. of the former perils), 1281.

ge-weorethan: 1) _to become_: pret. sg. ge-weareth, 3062; pret. part. cearu waes
geniwod ge-worden (_care was renewed_), 1305; swa us ge-worden is,
3079.--2) _to finish; complete?_: inf. þaet þu ... lete Sueth-Dene sylfe
ge-weorethan guethe wieth Grendel (_that thou wouldst let the S. D. put an end to
their war with Grendel_), 1997.--3) impersonally with acc., _to agree,
decide_: pret. sg. þa þaes monige ge-weareth þaet ... (_since many agreed that_
...), 1599; pret. part. hafaeth þaes ge-worden wine Scyldinga, rices hyrde,
and þaet raed talaeth þaet he ... (_therefore hath it so appeared(?) advisable
to the friend of the S., the guardian of the realm, and he counts it a gain
that_ ...), 2027.

weoreth-ful, adj., _glorious, full of worth_: nom. sg. weoreth-fullost, 3100.

weorethian, w. v., _to honor, adorn_: pret. sg. þaer ic ... þine leode
weorethode weorcum (_there honored I thy people by my deeds_), 2097; subj.
pret. (þaet he) aet feoh-gyftum ... Dene weorethode (_that he would honor the
Danes at, by, treasure-giving_), 1091.

ge-weorethian, ge-wurethian, _to deck, ornament_: pret. part. hire syethethan waes
aefter beah-þege breost ge-weorethod, 2177; waepnum ge-weorethad, 250; since
ge-weorethad, 1451; so, ge-wurethad, 331, 1039, 1646; wide ge-weorethad (_known,
honored, afar_), 1960.

weoreth-lice, adv., _worthily, nobly_: superl. weoreth-licost, 3163.

weoreth-mynd, st. f. n., _dignity, honor, glory_: nom. sg., 65; acc. sg.
geseah þa eald sweord ..., wigena weorethmynd (_saw an ancient sword there,
the glory of warriors_), 1560; dat. instr. pl. weoreth-myndum, 8; to
woreth-myndum, 1187; gen. pl. weoreth-mynda dael, 1753.

weorethung, st. f., _ornament_: in comp. breost-, ham-, heorft-, hring-,
wig-weorethung.

weorod. See werod.

weorpan, st. v.: 1) _to throw, cast away_, w. acc.: pret. sg. wearp þa
wunden-mael wraettum gebunden yrre oretta, þaet hit on eorethan laeg (_the
wrathful warrior threw the ornamented sword, that it lay on the earth_),
1532.--2) _to throw around_ or _about_, w. instr.: pret. sg. beorges weard
. .. wearp wael-fyre (_threw death-fire around_), 2583.--3) _to throw upon_:
inf. he hine eft ongan waeteres (instr. gen.) weorpan (_began to cast water
upon him again_), 2792.

for-weorpan, w. acc., _to cast away, squander_: subj. pret. þaet he genunga
gueth-gewaedu wraethe for-wurpe (_that he squandered uselessly the
battle-weeds_, i.e. gave them to the unworthy), 2873.

ofer-weorpan, _to stumble_: pret. sg. ofer-wearp þa ... wigena strongest,
1544.

weotian, w. v., _to provide with, adjust_(?): pret. part. acc. pl.
wael-bende weotode, 1937.

be-weotian, be-witian, w. v. w. acc., _to regard, observe, care for_: pres.
pl. III. be-witiaeth, 1136; pret. sg. þegn ... se þe ... ealle be-weotede
þegnes þearfe (_who would attend to all the needs of a thane_), 1797; draca
se þe ... hord be-weotode (_the drake that guarded a treasure_), 2213;--_to
carry out, undertake_: pres. pl. III. þa ... oft be-witigaeth sorh-fulne sieth
on segl-rade, 1429.

wicg, st. n., _steed, riding-horse_: nom. sg., 1401; acc. sg. wicg, 315;
dat. instr. sg. wicge, 234; on wicge, 286; acc. pl. wicg, 2175; gen. pl.
wicga, 1046.

ge-widor, st. n., _storm, tempest_: acc. pl. laeth ge-widru (_loathly
weather_), 1376.

wieth prep. w. dat. and acc., with fundamental meanings of division and
opposition: 1) w. dat., _against, with_ (in hostile sense), _from_: þa wieth
gode wunnon, 113; ana (wan) wieth eallum, 145; ymb feorh sacan, laeth wieth
laethum, 440; so, 426, 439, 550, 2372, 2521, 2522, 2561, 2840, 3005; þaet him
holt-wudu ... helpan ne meahte, lind wieth lige, 2342; hwaet ... selest waere
wieth faer-gryrum to ge-fremmanne, 174; þaet him gast-bona geoce gefremede wieth
þeod-þreaum, 178; wieth rihte wan (_strove against right_), 144; haefde ...
sele Hroethgares ge-nered wieth niethe (_had saved H.'s hall from strife_), 828;
(him dyrne langaeth ...) beorn wieth blode (_the hero longeth secretly contrary
to his blood_, i.e. H. feels a secret longing for the non-related Beowulf),
1881; sundur ge-daelan lif wieth lice (_to sunder soul from body_), 2424;
streamas wundon sund wieth sande (_the currents rolled the sea against the
sand_), 213; lig-yethum forborn bord wieth ronde (rond, MS.) (_with waves of
flame burnt the shield against, as far as, the rim_), 2674; holm storme
weol, won wieth winde (_the sea surged, wrestled with the wind_), 1133; so,
hiora in anum weoll sefa wieth sorgum (_in one of them surged the soul with
sorrow_ [_against_?, Heyne]), 2601; þaet hire wieth healse heard grapode
(_that the sharp sword bit against her neck_), 1567.--2) w. acc.: a)
_against, towards_: wan wieth Hroethgar (_fought against H._), 152; wieth feonda
gehwone, 294; wieth wraeth werod, 319; so, 540, 1998, 2535; hine halig god us
on-sende wieth Grendles gryre, 384; þaet ic wieth þone gueth-flogan gylp
ofer-sitte (_that I refrain from boastful speech against the
battle-flier_), 2529; ne wolde wieth manna ge-hwone ... feorh-bealo feorran
(_would not cease his life-plotting against any of the men_; or, _withdraw
life-bale from_, etc.? or, _peace would not have with any man..., mortal
bale withdraw_?, Kemble), 155; ic þa leode wat ge wieth feond ge wieth freond
faeste geworhte (_towards foe and friend_), 1865; heold heah-lufan wieth
haeleetha brego (_cherished high love towards the prince of heroes_), 1955;
wieth ord and wieth ecge ingang forstod (_prevented entrance to spear-point and
sword-edge_), 1550. b) _against, on, upon, in_: setton side scyldas ... wieth
þaes recedes weal (_against the wall of the hall_), 326; wieth eorethan faeethm
(eardodon) (_in the bosom of the earth_), 3050; wieth earm ge-saet (_sat on,
against, his arm_), 750; so, stieth-mod ge-stod wieth steapne rond, 2567; [wieth
duru healle eode] (_went to the door of the hall_), 389; wieth Hrefna-wudu
(_over against, near, H._), 2926; wieth his sylfes sunu setl ge-taehte
(_showed me to a seat with, near, beside, his own son_), 2014. c) _towards,
with_ (of contracting parties): þaet hie healfre ge-weald wieth Eotena bearn
agan moston (_that they power over half the hall with the Eotens' sons were
to possess_), 1089; þenden he wieth wulf wael reafode (_whilst with the wolf
he was robbing the slain_), 3028.--3) Alternately with dat. and acc.,
_against_: nu wieth Grendel sceal, wieth þam aglaecan, ana gehegan þing wieth
þyrse, 424-426;--_with, beside_: ge-saet þa wieth sylfne..., maeg wieth maege,
1978-79.

wiether-gyld, st. n., _compensation_: nom. sg., 2052, [proper name?].

wiether-raehtes, adv., _opposite, in front of_, 3040.

wiethre, st. n., _resistance_: gen. sg. wiethres ne truwode, 2954.

wig-weorethung, st. f., _idol-worship, idolatry, sacrifice to idols_: acc.
pl. -weorethunga, 176.

wiht, st. f.: 1) _wight, creature, demon_: nom. sg. wiht unhaelo (_the demon
of destruction_, Grendel), 120; acc. sg. syllicran wiht (the dragon),
3039.--2) _thing, something, aught_: nom. sg. w. negative, ne hine wiht
dweleeth (_nor does aught check him_), 1736; him wiht ne speow (_it helped
him naught_), 2855; acc. sg. ne him þaes wyrmes wig for wiht dyde (_nor did
he count the worm's warring for aught_), 2349; ne meahte ic ... wiht
gewyrcan _(I could not do aught_ ...), 1661;--w. partitive gen.: no ...
wiht swylcra searo-nietha, 581;--the acc. sg. = adv. like Germ. _nicht_: ne
hie huru wine-drihten wiht ne logon (_did not blame their friendly lord
aught_), 863; so, ne wiht = _naught, in no wise_, 1084, 2602, 2858; no
wiht, 541; instr. sg. wihte (_in aught, in any way_), 1992; ne ... wihte
(_by no means_), 186, 2278, 2688; wihte ne, 1515, 1996, 2465, 2924.--Comp.:
a-wiht (aht = _aught_), ael-wiht, o-wiht.

wil-cuma, w. m., _one welcome_ (qui gratus advenit): nom. pl. wil-cuman
Denigea leodum (_welcome to the people of the Danes_), 388; so, him (the
lord of the Danes) wil-cuman, 394; wil-cuman Wedera leodum (_welcome to the
Geatas_), 1895.

ge-wild, st. f., _free-will_? dat. pl. nealles mid ge-weoldum (_sponte,
voluntarily_, Bugge), 2223.

wil-deor (for wild-deor), st. n., _wild beast_: acc. pl. wil-deor, 1431.

wil-gesieth, st. m., _chosen_ or _willing companion_: nom. pl. -ge-siethas, 23.

wil-geofa, w. m., _ready giver_ (= voti largitor: princely designation),
_joy-giver_?: nom. sg. wil-geofa Wedra leoda, 2901.

willa, w. m.: 1) _will, wish, desire, sake_: nom. sg. 627, 825; acc. sg.
willan, 636, 1740, 2308, 2410; instr. sg. anes willan (_for the sake of
one_), 3078; so, 2590; dat. sg. to willan, 1187, 1712; instr. pl. willum
(_according to wish_), 1822; sylfes willum, 2224, 2640; gen. pl. wilna,
1345.--2) _desirable thing, valuable_: gen. pl. wilna, 661, 951.

willan, aux. v., _will_: in pres. also _shall_ (when the future action is
depend. on one's free will): pres. sg. I. wille ic a-secgan (_I will set
forth, tell out_), 344; so, 351, 427; ic to sae wille (_I will to sea_),
318; wylle, 948, 2149, 2513; sg. II. þu wylt, 1853; sg. III. he wile, 346,
446, 1050, 1182, 1833; wyle, 2865; wille, 442, 1004, 1185, 1395; aer he in
wille (_ere he will in_, i.e. go or flee into the fearful sea), 1372;
wylle, 2767; pl. I. we ... wyllaeth, 1819; pret. sg. I., III. wolde, 68, 154,
200, 646, 665, 739, 756, 797, 881, etc.; no ic fram him wolde (i.e.
fleotan), 543; so, swa he hira ma wolde (i.e. a-cwellan), 1056; pret. pl.
woldon, 482, 2637, 3173; subj. pret., 2730.--Forms contracted w. negative:
pres. sg. I. nelle (= ne + wille, _I will not_, nolo), 680, 2525(?); pret.
sg. III. nolde (= ne + wolde), 792, 804, 813, 1524; w. omitted inf. þa
metod nolde, 707, 968; pret. subj. nolde, 2519.

wilnian, w. v., _to long for, beseech_: inf. wel bieth þaem þe mot ... to
faeder faeethmum freoetho wilnian (_well for him that may beseech protection in
the Father's arms_), 188.

wil-sieth, st. m., _chosen journey_: acc. sg. wil-sieth, 216.

ge-win, st. n.: 1) _strife, struggle, enmity, conflict_: acc. sg., 878; þa
hie ge-win drugon (_endured strife_), 799; under yetha ge-win (_under the
tumult of the waves_), 1470; gen. sg. þaes ge-winnes weorc (_misery for this
strife_), 1722.--2) _suffering, oppression_: nom. sg., 133, 191; acc. sg.
eald ge-win, 1782.--Comp.: fyrn-, yeth-ge-win.

win-aern, st. n., _hall of hospitality, hall, wine-hall_: gen. sg.
win-aernes, 655.

wind, st. m., _wind, storm_: nom. sg., 547, 1375, 1908; dat. instr. sg.
winde, 217; wieth winde, 1133.

windan, st. v.: 1) intrans., _to wind, whirl_: pret. sg. wand to wolcnum
wael-fyra maest, 1120.--2) w. acc., _to twist, wind, curl_: pret. pl.
streamas wundon sund wieth sande, 212; pret. part. wunden gold (_twisted,
spirally-twined, gold_), 1194, 3135; instr. pl. wundnum (wundum, MS.)
golde, 1383.

aet-windan, _to wrest one's self from, escape_: pret. sg. se þaem feonde
aet-wand, 143.

be-windan, _to wind with_ or _round, clasp, surround, envelop_ (involvere):
pret. sg. þe hit (the sword) mundum be-wand, 1462; pret. part. wirum
be-wunden (_wound with wires_) 1032; feorh ... flaesce be-wunden
(_flesh-enclosed_), 2425; gar ... mundum be-wunden (_a spear grasped with
the hands_), 3023; iu-manna gold galdre be-wunden (_spell-encircled gold_),
3053; (astah ...) leg wope be-wunden (_uprose the flame mingled with a
lament_), 3147.

ge-windan, _to writhe, get loose, escape_: inf. widre ge-windan (_to flee
further_), 764; pret. sg. on fleam ge-wand, 1002.

on-windan, _to unwind, loosen_: pres. sg. (þonne faeder) on-windeeth
wael-rapas, 1611.

win-daeg, st. m., _day of struggle_ or _suffering_: dat. pl. on þyssum
win-dagum (_in these days of sorrow_, i.e. of earthly existence), 1063.

wind-bland (blond), st. n., _wind-roar_: nom. sg., 3147.

wind-gereste, f., _resting-place of the winds_: acc. sg., 2457.

windig, adj., _windy_: acc. pl. windige (weallas, naessas), 572, 1359;
windige weallas (wind geard weallas, MS.), 1225.

wine, st. m., _friend, protector_, especially the _beloved ruler_: nom. sg.
wine Scyldinga, leof land-fruma (Scyld), 30; wine Scyldinga (Hroethgar), 148,
1184. As vocative: min wine, 2048; wine min, Beowulf (Hunfereth), 457, 530,
1705; acc. sg. holdne wine (Hroethgar), 376; wine Deniga, Scyldinga, 350,
2027; dat. sg. wine Scyldinga, 170; gen. sg. wines (Beowulf), 3097; acc.
pl. wine, 21; dat. pl. Denum eallum, winum Scyldinga, 1419; gen. pl.
winigea leasum, 1665; winia bealdor, 2568.--Comp.: frea-, freo-, gold-,
gueth-, maeg-wine.

wine-dryhten, st. m., (dominus amicus), _friendly lord, lord and friend_:
acc. sg. wine-drihten, 863, 1605; wine-dryhten, 2723, 3177; dat. sg.
wine-drihtne, 360.

wine-geomor, adj., _friend-mourning_: nom. sg., 2240.

wine-leas, adj., _friendless_: dat. sg. wine-leasum, 2614.

wine-maeg, st. m., _dear kinsman_: nom. pl. wine-magas, 65.

ge-winna, w. m., _striver, struggler, foe_: comp. eald-, ealdor-gewinna.

winnan, st. v., _to struggle, fight_: pret. sg. III. wan ana wieth eallum,
144; Grendel wan ... wieth Hroethgar, 151; holm ... won wieth winde (_the sea
fought with the wind_: cf. wan wind endi water, Heliand, 2244), 1133; II.
eart þu se Beowulf, se þe wieth Brecan wunne, 506; pl. wieth gode wunnon, 113;
þaer þa graman wunnon (_where the foes fought_), 778.

win-reced, st. n., _wine-hall, guest-hall, house for entertaining guests_:
acc. sg., 715, 994.

win-sele, st. m., the same, _wine-hall_: nom. sg., 772; dat. sg. win-sele,
696 (cf. Heliand Glossary, 369 [364]).

winter, st. m. n.: 1) _winter_: nom. sg., 1133, 1137; acc. sg. winter,
1129; gen. sg. wintres, 516.--2) _year_ (counted by winters): acc. pl.
fiftig wintru (neut.), 2210; instr. pl. wintrum, 1725, 2115, 2278; gen. pl.
wintra, 147, 264, 1928, 2279, 2734, 3051.

wintre, adj., _so many winters_ (old): in comp. syfan-wintre.

ge-wislice, adv., _certainly, undoubtedly_: superl. gewislicost, 1351.

wist, st. f., fundamental meaning = _existentia_, hence: 1) _good
condition, happiness, abundance_: dat. sg. wunaeth he on wiste, 1736.--2)
_food, subsistence, booty_: dat. sg. þa waes aefter wiste wop up a-hafen (_a
cry was then uplifted after the meal_, i.e. Grendel's meal of thirty men),
128.

wist-fyllo, st. f., _fulness_ or _fill of food, rich meal_: gen. sg.
wist-fylle, 735.

wit, st. n., (wit), _understanding_: nom. sg., 590.--Comp.: fyr-, in-wit.

ge-wit, st. n.: 1) _consciousness_. dat. sg. ge-weold his ge-witte,
2704.--2) _heart, breast_: dat. sg. fyr unswiethor weoll (_the fire surged
less strongly from the dragon's breast_), 2883.

wit, pers. pron. dual of we, _we two_, 535, 537, 539, 540, 544, 1187, etc.
See unc, uncer.

wita, weota, w. m., _counsellor, royal adviser_; pl., _the king's council
of nobles_: nom. pl. witan, 779: gen. pl. witena, 157, 266, 937 weotena,
1099.--Comp.: fyrn-, run-wita.

witan, pret.-pres. v., _to wot, know_. 1) w. depend, clause: pres. sg. I.,
III. wat, 1332, 2657; ic on Higelace wat þaet he ... (_I know as to H., that
he_ ...), 1831; so, god wat on mec þaet ...(_God knows of me, that_ ...),
2651; sg. II. þu wast, 272; weak pret. sg. I., III. wiste, 822; wisse,
2340, 2726; pl. wiston, 799, 1605; subj. pres. I. gif ic wiste, 2520.--2)
w. acc. and inf.: pres. sg. I. ic wat, 1864.--3) w. object, predicative
part, or adj.: pret. sg. III. to þaes he win-reced ... gearwost wisse,
faettum fahne, 716; so, 1310; wiste þaem ahlaecan hilde ge-binged, 647.--4) w.
acc., _to know_: inf. witan, 252, 288; pret. sg. wisse, 169; wiste his
fingra ge-weald on grames grapum, 765; pl. II. wisson, 246; wiston, 181.

nat = ne + wat, _I know not_: 1) elliptically with hwylc, indef. pronoun =
_some or other_: sceaetha ic nat hwylc.--2) w. gen. and depend. clause: nat
he þara goda, þaet he me on-gean slea, 682.

ge-witan, _to know, perceive_: inf. þaes þe hie gewis-licost ge-witan
meahton, 1351.

be-witian. See be-weotian.

witig, adj., _wise, sagacious_: nom. sg. witig god, 686, 1057; witig
drihten (God), 1555; wittig drihten, 1842.

ge-wittig, adj., _conscious_: nom. sg. 3095.

ge-witnian, w. v., _to chastise, punish_: wommum gewitnad (_punished with
plagues_), 3074.

wic, st. n., _dwelling, house_: acc. sg. wic, 822, 2590;--often in pl.
because houses of nobles were complex: dat. wicum, 1305, 1613, 3084; gen.
wica, 125, 1126.

ge-wican, st. v., _to soften, give way, yield_ (here chiefly of swords):
pret. sg. ge-wac, 2578, 2630.

wic-stede, st. m., _dwelling-place_: nom. sg. 2463; acc. sg. wic-stede,
2608.

wid, adj., _wide, extended_: 1) space: acc. sg. neut. ofer wid waeter, 2474;
gen. sg. widan rices, 1860; acc. pl. wide siethas, waroethas, 878, 1966.--2)
temporal: acc. sg. widan feorh (acc. of time), 2015; dat. sg. to widan
feore, 934.

wide, adv., _widely, afar_, 18, 74, 79, 266, 1404, 1589, 1960, etc.; wide
cueth (_widely, universally, known_), 2136, 2924; so, underne wide, 2914;
wide geond eorethan (_over the whole earth, widely_), 3100;--modifier of
superl.: wreccena wide maerost (_the most famous of wanderers, exiles_),
899.--Compar. widre, 764.

wid-cueth, adj., _widely known, very celebrated_: nom. sg. neut., 1257; acc.
sg. m. wid-cuethne man (Beowulf), 1490; wid-cuethne wean, 1992; wid-cuethes
(Hroethgar), 1043.

wide-ferheth, st. m. n., (_long life_), _great length of time_: acc. sg. as
acc. of time: wide-ferheth (_down to distant times, always_), 703, 938; ealne
wide-ferheth, 1223.

wid-floga, w. m., _wide-flier_ (of the dragon): nom. sg., 2831; acc. sg.
wid-flogan, 2347.

wid-scofen, pret. part., _wide-spread_? _causing fear far and wide_? 937.

wid-weg, st. m., _wide way, long journey_: acc. pl. wid-wegas, 841, 1705.

wif, st. n., _woman, lady, wife_: nom. sg. freo-lic wif (Queen Wealhþeow),
616; wif un-hyre (Grendel's mother), 2121; acc. sg. drihtlice wif (Finn's
wife), 1159; instr. sg. mid þy wife (Hroethgar's daughter, Freawaru), 2029;
dat. sg. þam wife (Wealhþeow), 640; gen. sg. wifes (as opposed to _man_),
1285; gen. pl. wera and wifa, 994.--Comp.: aglaec-, mere-wif.

wif-lufe, w. f., _wife-love, love for a wife, woman's love_: nom. pl.
wif-lufan, 2066.

wig, st. m.: 1) _war, battle_: nom. sg., 23, 1081, 2317, 2873; acc. sg.,
686, 1084, 1248; dat. sg. wige, 1338, 2630; as instr., 1085; (wigge, MS.),
1657, 1771; gen. sg. wiges, 65, 887, 1269.--2) _valor, warlike prowess_:
nom. sg. waes his mod-sefa manegum ge-cyethed, wig and wisdom, 350; wig, 1043;
wig ... eafoeth and ellen, 2349; gen. sg. wiges, 2324.--Comp. feethe-wig.

wiga, w. m., _warrior, fighter_: nom. sg., 630; dat. pl. wigum, 2396; gen.
pl. wigena, 1544, 1560, 3116.--Comp.: aesc-, byrn-, gar-, gueth-, lind-,
rand-, scyld-wiga.

wigan, st. v., _to fight_: pres. sg. III. wigeeth, 600; inf., 2510.

wigend, pres. part., _fighter, warrior_: nom. sg., 3100; nom. pl. wigend,
1126, 1815, 3145; acc. pl. wigend, 3025; gen. pl. wigendra, 429, 900, 1973,
2338.--Comp. garwigend.

wig-bealu, st. n., _war-bale, evil contest_: acc. sg., 2047.

wig-bil, st. n., _war-bill, battle-sword_: nom. sg., 1608.

wig-bord, st. n., _war-board_ or _shield_: acc. sg., 2340.

wig-craeft, st. m., _war-power_: acc. sg., 2954.

wig-craeftig, adj., _vigorous in fight, strong in war_: acc. sg.
wig-craeftigne (of the sword Hrunting), 1812.

wig-freca, w. m., _war-wolf, war-hero_: acc. sg. wig-frecan, 2497; nom. pl.
wig-frecan, 1213.

wig-fruma, w. m., _war-chief_ or _king_: nom. sg., 665; acc. sg.
wig-fruman, 2262.

wig-geatwe, st. f. pl., _war-ornaments, war-gear_: dat. pl. on wig-geatwum
(-getawum, MS.), 368.

wig-ge-weorethad, pret. part., _war-honored, distinguished in war_, 1784? See
Note.

wig-gryre, st. m., _war-horror_ or _terror_: nom. sg., 1285.

wig-hete, st. m., _war-hate, hostility_: nom. sg., 2121.

wig-heafola, w. m., _war head-piece, helmet_: acc. sg. wig-heafolan,
2662.--Leo.

wig-heap, st. m., _war-band_: nom sg., 447.

wig-hryre, st. m., _war-ruin, slaughter, carnage_: acc. sg., 1620.

wig-sigor, st. m., _war-victory_: acc. sg., 1555.

wig-sped, st. f.?, _war-speed, success in war_: gen. pl. wig-speda, 698.

win, st. n., _wine_: acc. sg., 1163, 1234; instr. wine, 1468.

wir, st. n., _wire, spiral ornament of wire_: instr. pl. wirum, 1032; gen.
pl. wira, 2414.

wis, adj., _wise, experienced, discreet_: nom. sg. m. wis (_in his mind,
conscious_), 3095; f. wis, 1928; in w. form, se wisa, 1401, 1699, 2330;
acc. sg. þone wisan, 1319; gen. pl. wisra, 1414; w. gen. nom. sg. wis
wordcwida (_wise of speech_), 1846.

wisa, w. m., _guide, leader_: nom. sg. werodes wisa, 259.--Comp.: brim-,
here-, hilde-wisa.

wiscte. See wyscan.

wis-dom, st. m., _wisdom, experience_: nom. sg., 350; instr. sg. wis-dome,
1960.

wise, w. f., _fashion, wise, custom_: acc. sg. (instr.) ealde wisan (_after
ancient custom_), 1866.

wis-faest, adj., _wise, sagacious_ (sapientia firmus): nom. sg. f., 627.

wis-hycgende, pres. part. _wise-thinking, wise_, 2717.

wisian, w. v., _to guide_ or _lead to, direct, point out_: 1) w. acc.: inf.
hean wong wisian, 2410; pret. sg. secg wisade land-gemyrcu, 208.--2) w.
dat.: pres. sg. I. ic eow wisige (_I shall guide you_), 292, 3104; pret.
sg. se þaem heaetho-rincum hider wisade, 370; sona him sele-þegn ... foreth
wisade _(the hall-thane led him thither forthwith_, i.e. to his couch),
1796; stig wisode gumum aet-gaedere, 320; so, 1664.--3) w. prep.?: pret. sg.
þa secg wisode under Heorotes hrof (_when the warrior showed them the way
under Heorot's roof_, [but under H.'s hrof depends rather on snyredon
aetsomne]), 402.

witan, st. v., properly _to look at; to look at with censure, to blame,
reproach, accuse_, w. dat. of pers. and acc. of thing: inf. for-þam me
witan ne þearf waldend fira morethor-bealo maga, 2742.

aet-witan, _to blame, censure_ (cf. 'twit), w. acc. of thing: pret. pl.
aet-witon weana dael, 1151.

ge-witan, properly _spectare aliquo; to go_ (most general verb of motion):
1) with inf. after verbs of motion: pret. sg. þanon eft ge-wat ... to ham
faran, 123; so, 2570; pl. þanon eft gewiton ... mearum ridan, 854.
Sometimes with reflex, dat.: pres. sg. him þa Scyld ge-wat ... feran on
frean waere, 26; gewat him ... ridan, 234; so, 1964; pl. ge-witon, 301.--2)
associated with general infinitives of motion and aim: imper. pl. ge-witaeth
foreth beran waepen and gewaedu, 291; pret. sg. ge-wat þa neosian hean huses,
115; he þa fag ge-wat ... man-dream fleon, 1264; nyether eft gewat dennes
niosian, 3045; so, 1275, 2402, 2820. So, with reflex, dat.: him eft gewat
... hames niosan, 2388; so, 2950; pl. ge-witon, 1126.--3) without inf. and
with prep, or adv.: pres. sg. III. þaer firgen-stream under naessa genipu
niether ge-witeeth, 1361; ge-witeeth on sealman, 2461; inf. on flodes aeht feor
ge-witan, 42; pret. sg. ge-wat, 217; him ge-wat, 1237, 1904; of life,
ealdre ge-wat (_died_), 2472, 2625; fyrst foreth ge-wat (_time went on_),
210; him ge-wat ut of healle, 663; ge-wat him ham, 1602; pret. part. dat.
sg. me foreth-ge-witenum (_me defuncto, I dead_), 1480.

oeth-witan, _to blame, censure, reproach_: inf. ne þorfte him þa lean
oeth-witan mon on middan-gearde, 2997.

wlanc, wlonc, adj., _proud, exulting_: nom. sg. wlanc, 341; w. instr. aese
wlanc (_proud of, exulting in, her prey, meal_), 1333; wlonc, 331; w. gen.
maethm-aehta wlonc (_proud of the treasures_), 2834; gen. sg. wlonces,
2954.--Comp. gold-wlanc.

wlatian, w. v., _to look_ or _gaze out, forth_: pret. sg. se þe aer ... feor
wlatode, 1917.

wlenco, st. f., _pride, heroism_: dat. sg. wlenco, 338, 1207; wlence, 508.

wlite, st. m. _form, noble form, look, beauty_: nom. sg., 250.

wlite-beorht, adj., _beauteous, brilliant in aspect_: acc. sg.
wlite-beorhtne wang, 93.

wlite-seon, st. n. f., _sight, spectacle_: acc. sg., 1651.

wlitig, adj., _beautiful, glorious, fair in form_: acc. sg. wlitig
(sweord), 1663.

wlitan, st. v., _to see, look, gaze_: pret. sg. he aefter recede wlat
(_looked along the hall_), 1573; pret. pl. on holm wliton (_looked on the
sea_), 1593; wlitan on Wiglaf, 2853.

geond-wlitan, w. acc., _to examine, look through, scan_: inf. wraete
giond-wlitan, 2772.

woh-bogen, pret. part., (_bent crooked), crooked, twisted_: nom. sg. wyrm
woh-bogen, 2828.

wolcen, st. n. m., _cloud_ (cf. welkin): dat. pl. under wolcnum (_under the
clouds, on earth_), 8, 652, 715, 1771; to wolcnum, 1120, 1375.

wollen-tear, adj., _tear-flowing, with flowing tears_: nom. pl.
wollen-teare, 3033.

wom. See wam.

won. See wan.

worc. See weorc.

word, st. n.: 1) _word, speech_: nom. sg., 2818; acc. sg. þaet word, 655,
2047; word, 315, 341, 390, 871, 2552; instr. sg. worde, 2157; gen. sg.
wordes, 2792; nom. pl. þa word, 640; word, 613; acc. pl. word (of an
alliterative song), 871; instr. pl, wordum, 176, 366, 627, 875, 1101, 1173,
1194, 1319, 1812, etc.; ge-saga him wordum (_tell them in words,
expressly_), 388. The instr. wordum accompanies biddan, þancian, be-waegnan,
secgan, hergan, to emphasize the verb, 176, 627, 1194, 2796, 3177; gen. pl.
worda, 289, 398, 2247, 2263(?), 3031.--2) _command, order_: gen. sg. his
wordes geweald habban (_to rule, reign_), 79; so, instr. pl. wordum weold,
30.--Comp.: beot-, gylp-, meethel-, þryeth-word.

word-cwide, st. m., (_word-utterance_), _speech_: acc. pl. word-cwydas,
1842; dat. pl. word-cwydum, 2754; gen. pl. word-cwida, 1846.

word-gid, st. m, _speech, saying_: acc. sg. word-gyd, 3174.

word-hord, st. n., _word-hoard, treasury of speech, mouth_: acc. sg.
word-hord on-leac (_unlocked his word-hoard_, opened his mouth, spoke),
259.

word-riht, st. n., _right speech, suitable word_: gen. pl. Wiglaf maethelode
word-rihta fela, 2632.

woreth-mynd. See weoreth-mynd.

worethig (for weorethig), st. m., _palace, estate, court_: acc. sg. on worethig
(_into the palace_), 1973.

worn, st. n., _multitude, number_: acc. sg. worn eall (_very many_), 3095;
wintra worn (_many years_), 264; þonne he wintrum frod worn ge-munde (_when
he old in years thought of their number_), 2115. Used with fela to
strengthen the meaning: nom. acc. sg. worn fela, 1784; hwaet þu worn fela
... spraece (_how very much thou hast spoken!_), 530; so, eal-fela
eald-gesegena worn, 871; gen. pl. worna fela, 2004, 2543.

woruld, worold, st. f., _humanity, world, earth_: nom. sg. eal worold,
1739; acc. sg. in worold (wacan) (_to be born, come into the world_), 60;
worold oflaetan, of-gifan (_die_), 1184, 1682; gen. sg. worolde, 951, 1081,
1388, 1733; worulde, 2344; his worulde ge-dal (_his separation from the
world, death_), 3069; worolde brucan (_to enjoy life, live_), 1063; worlde,
2712.

worold-ar, st. f., _worldly honor_ or _dignity_: acc. sg. worold-are, 17.

woruld-candel, st. f., _world-candle, sun_: nom. sg., 1966.

worold-cyning, st. m., _world king, mighty king_: nom. sg., 3182; gen. pl.
worold-cyninga, 1685.

woruld-ende, st. m., _world's end_: acc. sg., 3084.

worold-raeden, st. f., _usual course, fate of the world, customary fate_:
dat. sg. worold-raedenne, 1143?

wop, st. m., (_whoop_), _cry of grief, lament_: nom. sg., 128; acc. sg.
wop, 786; instr. sg. wope, 3147.

wracu, st. f., _persecution, vengeance, revenge_: nom. sg. wracu (MS,
uncertain), 2614; acc. sg. wraece, 2337.--Comp.: gyrn-, nyd-wracu.

wraethu, st. f., _protection, safety_: in comp. lif-wraethu.

wraeth, adj., _wroth, furious, hostile_: acc. sg. neut. wraeth, 319; dat. sg.
wraethum, 661, 709; gen. pl. wraethra, 1620.

wraethe, adv., _contemptibly, disgracefully_, 2873.

wraeth-lice, adv., _wrathfully, hostilely_ (in battle), 3063.

wrasn, st. f., _circlet of gold for the head, diadem, crown_: in comp.
frea-wrasn.

wraec-last, st. m., _exile-step, exile, banishment_: acc. sg. wraec-lastas
traed (_trod exile-steps, wandered in exile_), 1353.

wraec-maecg, st. m., _exile, outcast_: nom. pl. wraec-maecgas, 2380.

wraec-sieth, st. m., _exile-journey, banishment, exile, persecution_: acc.
sg., 2293; dat. sg. -siethum, 338.

wraet, st. f., _ornament, jewel_: acc. pl. wraete (wraece, MS.), 2772, 3061;
instr. pl. wraettum, 1532; gen. pl. wraetta, 2414.

wraet-lic, adj.: 1) _artistic, ornamental; valuable_: acc. sg. wraet-licne
wundur-maethethum, 2174; wraet-lic waeg-sweord, 1490; wig-bord wraet-lic,
2340.--2) _wondrous, strange_: acc. sg. wraet-licne wyrm [from its rings or
spots?], 892; wlite-seon wraet-lic, 1651.

wraec, st. f., _persecution_; hence, _wretchedness, misery_: nom. sg., 170;
acc. sg. wraec, 3079.

wrecan, st. v. w. acc.: 1) _to press, force_: pret. part. þaer waes Ongenþeo
... on bid wrecen, 2963.--2) _to drive out, expel_: pret. sg. ferh ellen
wraec, 2707.--3) _to wreak_ or _utter_: gid, spel wrecan (_to utter words or
songs_); subj. pres. sg. III. he gyd wrece, 2447; inf. wrecan spel ge-rade,
874; word-gyd wrecan, 3174; pret. sg. gyd aefter wraec, 2155; pres. part. þaer
waes ... gid wrecen, 1066.--4) _to avenge, punish_: subj. pres. þaet he his
freond wrece, 1386; inf. wolde hire maeg wrecan, 1340; so, 1279, 1547; pres.
part. wrecend (_an avenger_), 1257; pret. sg. wraec Wedera nieth, 423; so,
1334, 1670.

a-wrecan, _to tell, recount_: pret. sg. ic þis gid be þe a-wraec (_I have
told this tale for thee_), 1725; so, 2109.

for-wrecan, w. acc., _to drive away, expel; carry away_: inf. þy laes him
yetha þrym wudu wyn-suman for-wrecan meahte (_lest the force of the waves
might carry away the winsome ship_), 1920; pret. sg. he hine feor for-wraec
... man-cynne fram, 109.

ge-wrecan, w. acc., _to avenge, wreak vengeance upon, punish_: pret. sg.
ge-wraec, 107, 2006; he ge-wraec (i.e. hit, _this_) cealdum cear-siethum, 2396;
he hine sylfne ge-wraec (_avenged himself_), 2876; pl. ge-wraecan, 2480;
pret. part. ge-wrecen, 3063.

wrecca, w. m., (_wretch_), _exile, adventurer, wandering soldier, hero_:
nom. sg. wrecca (Hengest), 1138; gen. pl. wreccena wide maerost (Sigemund),
899.

wreoethen-hilt, adj., _wreathen-hilted, with twisted hilt_: nom. sg., 1699.

wridian, w. v., _to flourish, spring up_: pret. sg. III. wridaeth, 1742.

wrietha, w. m., _band_: in comp. beag-wrietha (_bracelet_), 2019.

wrixl, st. n., _exchange, change_: instr. sg. wyrsan wrixle (_in a worse
way, with a worse exchange_), 2970.

ge-wrixle, st. n., _exchange, arrangement, bargain_: nom. sg. ne waes þaet
ge-wrixle til (_it was not a good arrangement, trade_), 1305.

wrixlan, w. v., _to exchange_: inf. wordum wrixlan (_to exchange words,
converse_), 366; 875 (_tell_).

wriethan, st. v. w. acc.: 1) _to bind, fasten, wreathe together_: inf. ic
hine (him, MS.) ... on wael-bedde wriethan þohte, 965.--2) _to bind up_ (a
wounded person, a wound): pret. pl. þa waeron monige þe his maeg wriethon,
2983. See hand-gewriethen.

writan, st. v., _to incise, engrave_: pret. part. on þaem (hilte) waes or
writen fyrn-gewinnes (_on which was engraved the origin of an ancient
struggle_), 1689.

for-writan, _to cut to pieces_ or _in two_: pret. sg. for-wrat Wedra helm
wyrm on middan, 2706.

wroht, st. m. f., _blame, accusation, crime_; here _strife, contest,
hostility_: nom. sg., 2288, 2474, 2914.

wudu, st. m., _wood_: 1) _material, timber_: nom. pl. wudu, 1365; hence,
_the wooden spear_: acc. pl. wudu, 398.--2) _forest, wood_: acc. sg. wudu,
1417.--3) _wooden ship_: nom. sg. 298; acc. sg. wudu, 216, 1920.--Comp.:
bael-, bord-, gamen-, heal-, holt-, maegen-, sae-, sund-, þrec-wudu.

wudu-rec, st. m., _wood-reek_ or _smoke_: nom. sg., 3145.

wuldor, st. n., _glory_: nom. sg. kyninga wuldor (_God_), 666; gen. sg.
wuldres wealdend, 17, 183, 1753; wuldres hyrde, 932, (designations of God).

wuldor-cyning, st. m., _king of glory, God_. dat. sg. wuldur-cyninge, 2796

wuldor-torht, adj., _glory-bright, brilliant, clear_: acc. pl.
wuldor-torhtan weder, 1137.

wulf, st. m., _wolf_: acc. sg., 3028.

wulf-hlieth, st. n., _wolf-slope, wolf's retreat, slope whereunder wolves
house_: acc. pl. wulf-hleoethu, 1359.

wund, st. f., _wound_: nom. sg., 2712, 2977; acc. sg. wunde, 2532, 2907;
acc. sg. wunde, 2726; instr. pl. wundum, 1114, 2831, 2938.--Comp.
feorh-wund.

wund, adj., _wounded, sore_: nom. sg., 2747; dat. sg. wundum, 2754; nom.
pl. wunde, 565, 1076.

wunden-feax, adj., _curly-haired_ (of a horse's mane): nom. sg., 1401.

wunden-heals, adj., _with twisted_ or _curved neck_ or _prow_: nom. sg.
wudu wunden-hals (_the ship_), 298.

wunden-heorde?, _curly-haired_?: nom. sg. f., 3153.

wunden-mael, adj., _damascened, etched, with wavy ornaments_(?): nom. sg.
neut., 1532 (of a sword).

wunden-stefna, w. m. _curved prow, ship_: nom. sg., 220.

wundor, st. n.: 1) _wonder, wonderwork_: nom. sg., 772, 1725; wundur, 3063;
acc. sg. wundor, 841; wunder, 932; wundur, 2760, 3033, 3104; dat. sg.
wundre, 932; instr. pl. wundrum (_wondrously_), 1453, 2688; gen. pl.
wundra, 1608.--2) _portent, monster_: gen. pl. wundra, 1510.--Comp.: hand-,
nieth-, searo-wundor.

wundor-bebod, st. n., _wondrous command, strange order_: instr. pl.
-bebodum, 1748.

wundor-deaeth, st. m., _wonder-death, strange death_: instr. sg. wundor
deaethe, 3038.

wundor-faet, st. n., _wonder-vat, strange vessel_: dat. pl. of wundor-fatum
(_from wondrous vessels_), 1163.

wundor-lic, adj., _wonder like, remarkable_: nom. sg., 1441.

wundor-maethethum, st. m., _wonder-jewel, wonderful treasure_: acc. sg., 2174.

wundor-smieth, st. m., _wonder-smith, skilled smith, worker of marvellous
things_: gen. pl. wundor-smietha geweorc (the ancient giant's sword), 1682.

wundor-seon, st. f., _wondrous sight_: gen. pl. wunder-siona, 996.

wunian, w. v.: 1) _to stand, exist, remain_: pres. sg. III. þenden þaer
wunaeth on heah-stede husa selest (_as long as the best of houses stands
there on the high place_), 284; wunaeth he on wiste (_lives in plenty_),
1736; inf. on sele wunian (_to remain in the hall_), 3129; pret. sg. wunode
mid Finne (_remained with F._), 1129.--2) w. acc. or dat., _to dwell in, to
inhabit, to possess_: pres. sg. III. wunaeth wael-reste (_holds his
death-bed_), 2903; inf. waeter-egesan wunian scolde..., streamas, 1261;
wicum wunian, 3084; w. prep.: pres. sg. Higelac þaer aet ham wunaeth, 1924.

ge-wunian, w. acc.: 1) _to inhabit_: inf. ge-[wunian], 2276.--2) _to remain
with, stand by_: subj. pres. þaet hine on ylde eft ge-wunigen wil-ge-siethas,
22.

wurethan. See weorethan.

wuton, v. from witan, used as interj., _let us go! up!_ w. inf.: wutun
gangan to (_let us go to him!_), 2649; uton hraethe feran! 1391; uton nu
efstan, 3102.

wylf, st. f., _she-wolf_: in comp. brim-wylf.

wylm, st. m., _surge, surf, billow_: num. sg. flodes wylm, 1765; dat.
wintres wylme (_with winter's flood_), 516; acc. sg. þurh waeteres wylm,
1694; acc. pl. heortan wylmas, 2508.--Comp.: breost-, brim-, byrne-, cear-,
fyr-, heaetho-, holm-, sae-, sorh-wylm. See waelm.

wyn, st. f., _pleasantness, pleasure, joy, enjoyment_: acc. sg. maeste ...
worolde wynne (_the highest earthly joy_), 1081; eorethan wynne (_earth-joy,
the delightful earth_), 1731; heofenes wynne (_heaven's joy_, the rising
sun), 1802; hearpan wynne (_harp-joy, the pleasant harp_), 2108; þaet he ...
ge-drogen haefde eorethan wynne (_that he had had his earthly joy_), 2728;
dat. sg. weorod waes on wynne, 2015; instr. pl. maegenes wynnum (_in joy of
strength_), 1717; so, 1888.--Comp.: eethel-, hord-, lif-, lyft-, symbel-wyn.

wyn-leas, adj., _joyless_: acc. sg. wyn-leasne wudu, 1417; wyn-leas wic,
822.

wyn-sum, adj., _winsome, pleasant_: acc. sg. wudu wyn-suman (_the ship_),
1920; nom. pl. word waeron wyn-sume, 613.

wyrcan, v. irreg.: 1) _to do, effect_, w. acc.: inf. (wundor) wyrcan,
931.--2) _to make, create_, w. acc.: pret. sg. þaet se ael-mihtiga eorethan
worh[te], 92; swa hine _(the helmet_) worhte waepna smieth, 1453.--3) _to
gain, win, acquire_, w. gen.: subj. pres. wyrce, se þe mote, domes aer
deaethe, 1388.

be-wyrcan, _to gird, surround_: pret. pl. bronda betost wealle be-worhton,
3163.

ge-wyrcan: 1) intrans., _to act, behave_: inf. swa sceal geong guma gode
gewyrcean ... on faeder wine þaet ... (_a young man shall so act with
benefits towards his father's friends that_ ...), 20.--2) w. acc., _to do,
make, effect, perform_: inf. ne meahte ic aet hilde mid Hruntinge wiht
ge-wyrcan, 1661; sweorde ne meahte on þam aglaecan ... wunde ge-wyrcean,
2907; pret. sg. ge-worhte, 636, 1579, 2713; pret. part. acc. ic þa leode
wat ... faeste ge-worhte. 1865.--3) _to make, construct_: inf. (medo-aern)
ge-wyrcean, 69; (wig-bord) ge-wyrcean, 2338; (hlaew) ge-wyrcean, 2803; pret.
pl. II. ge-worhton, 3097; III. ge-worhton, 3158; pret. part. ge-worht,
1697.--4) _to win, acquire_: pres. sg. ic me mid Hruntinge dom ge-wyrce,
1492.

Wyrd, st. f., _Weird_ (one of the Norns, guide of human destiny; mostly
weakened down = _fate, providence_): nom. sg., 455, 477, 572, 735, 1206,
2421, 2527, 2575, 2815; acc. sg. wyrd, 1057, 1234; gen. pl. wyrda, 3031.
(Cf. Weird Sisters of Macbeth.)

wyrdan, w. v., _to ruin, kill, destroy_: pret. sg. he to lange leode mine
wanode and wyrde, 1338.

a-wyrdan, w. v., _to destroy, kill_: pret. part.: aeetheling monig wundum
a-wyrded, 1114.

wyrethe, adj., _noble; worthy, honored, valued_: acc. sg. m. wyrethne (ge-don)
(_to esteem worthy_), 2186; nom. pl. wyrethe, 368; compar. nom. sg. rices
wyrethra (_worthier of rule_), 862.--Comp. fyrd-wyrethe. See weoreth.

wyrgen, st, f., _throttler_ [cf. sphinx], _she-wolf_; in comp.
grund-wyrgen.

ge-wyrht, st. n., _work; desert_; in comp. eald-gewyrht, 2658.

wyrm, st. m., _worm, dragon, drake_: nom. sg., 898, 2288, 2344, 2568, 2630,
2670, 2746, 2828; acc. sg. wyrm, 887, 892, 2706, 3040, 3133; dat. sg.
wyrme, 2308, 2520; gen. wyrmes, 2317, 2349, 2760, 2772, 2903; acc. pl.
wyrmas, 1431.

wyrm-cyn, st. m., _worm-kin, race of reptiles, dragons_: gen. sg.
wyrm-cynnes fela, 1426.

wyrm-fah, adj., _dragon-ornamented, snake-adorned_ (ornamented with figures
of dragons, snakes, etc.: cf. Dietrich in Germania X., 278): nom. sg.
sweord ... wreoethen-hilt and wyrm-fah, 1699.

wyrm-hord, st. n., _dragon-hoard_: gen. pl. wyrm-horda, 2223.

for-wyrnan, w. v., _to refuse, reject_: subj. pres. II. þaet þu me no
for-wyrne, þaet... (_that thou refuse me not that_...), 429; pret. sg. he ne
for-wyrnde worold-raedenne, 1143.

ge-wyrpan, w. v. reflex., _to refresh one's self, recover_: pret. sg. he
hyne ge-wyrpte, 2977.

wyrpe, st. m., _change_: acc. sg. aefter wea-spelle wyrpe ge-fremman (_after
the woe-spell to bring about a change of things_), 1316.

wyrsa, compar. adj., _worse_: acc. sg. neut. þaet wyrse, 1740; instr. sg.
wyrsan wrixle, 2970; gen. sg. wyrsan geþinges, 525; nom. acc. pl. wyrsan
wig-frecan, 1213, 2497.

wyrt, st. f., [_-wort_], _root_: instr. pl. wudu wyrtum faest, 1365.

wyscan, w. v., _to wish, desire_: pret. sg. wiscte (rihde, MS.) þaes yldan
(_wished to delay that_ or _for this reason_, 2440, 1605(?). See Note.


Y

yfel, st n., _evil_: gen. pl. yfla, 2095.

yldan, w. v., _to delay, put off_: inf. ne þaet se aglaeca yldan þohte, 740;
weard wine-geomor wiscte þaes yldan, þaet he lytel faec long-gestreona brucan
moste, 2240.

ylde, st. m. pl., _men_: dat. pl. yldum, 77, 706, 2118; gen. pl. ylda, 150,
606, 1662. See elde.

yldest. See eald.

yldo, st. f., _age (senectus), old age_: nom. sg., 1737, 1887; atol yldo,
1767; dat. sg. on ylde, 22.--2) _age (aetas), time, era_: gen. sg. yldo
bearn, 70. See eldo.

yldra. See eald.

ylf, st. f., _elf (incubus, alp_): nom. pl. ylfe, 112.

ymb, prep. w. acc.: 1) local, _around, about, at, upon_: ymb hine (_around,
with, him_), 399. With prep, postponed: hine ymb, 690; ymb brontne ford
(_around the seas, on the high sea_), 568; ymb þa gif-healle (_around the
gift-hall, throne-hall_), 839; ymb þaes helmes hrof (_around the helm's
roof, crown_), 1031.--2) temporal, _about, after_: ymb an-tid oethres dogores
(_about the same time the next day_), 219; ymb ane niht (_after a night_),
135.--3) causal, _about, on account of, for, owing to_: (frinan) ymb þinne
sieth (_on account of, concerning?, thy journey_), 353; hwaet þu ... ymb
Brecan spraece (_hast spoken about B._), 531; so, 1596, 3174; na ymb his lif
cearaeth (_careth not for his life_), 1537; so, 450; ymb feorh sacan, 439;
sundor-nytte beheold ymb aldor Dena, 669; ymb sund (_about the swimming,
the prize for swimming_), 507.

ymbe, I. prep. w. acc. = ymb: 1) local, 2884, 3171; hlaew oft ymbe hwearf
(prep, postponed), 2297. 2) causal, 2071, 2619.--II. adv., _around_: him
... ymbe, 2598.

ymb-sittend, pres. part., _neighbor_ gen. pl. ymb-sittendra, 9.

ymbe-sittend, the same: nom. pl. ymbe-sittend, 1828; gen. pl.
ymbe-sittendra, 2735.

yppe, w. f., _high seat, dais, throne_: dat. sg. eode ... to yppan, 1816.

yrfe, st. n., _bequest, legacy_: nom. sg., 3052.

yrfe-laf, st. f., _sword left as a bequest_: acc. sg. yrfe-lafe, 1054;
instr. sg. yrfe-lafe, 1904.

yrfe-weard, st. m., _heir, son_: nom. sg., 2732; gen. sg. yrfe-weardes,
2454. (-as, MS.)

yrmetho, st. f., _misery, shame, wretchedness_: acc. sg. yrmethe, 1260, 2006.

yrre, st. n., _anger, ire, excitement_: acc. sg. godes yrre, 712; dat. sg,
on yrre, 2093.

yrre, adj., _angry, irate, furious_: nom. sg. yrre oretta (Beowulf), 1533;
þegn yrre (the same), 1576; gaest yrre (Grendel), 2074; nom. pl. yrre, 770.
See eorre.

yrringa, adv., _angrily, fiercely_, 1566, 2965.

yrre-mod, adj., _wrathful-minded, wild_: nom. sg., 727.

ys, _he is_. See wesan.


Y

yeth (O.H.G. unda), st. f., _wave; sea_: nom. pl. yetha, 548; acc. pl. yethe, 46,
1133, 1910; dat. pl. yethum, 210, 421, 534, 1438, 1908; yethum weallan (_to
surge with waves_), 515, 2694; gen. pl. yetha, 464, 849, 1209, 1470,
1919.--Comp: flod-, lig-, waeter-yeth.

yethan, w. v., _to ravage, devastate, destroy_: pret. sg. yethde eotena cyn,
421 (cf. iethende = _depopulating_, Bosworth, from AElfric's Glossary; pret.
yethde, Wanderer, 85).

yethe. See eaethe.

yethe-lice, adv., _easily_: yethe-lice he eft a-stod (_he easily arose
afterwards_), 1557.

yeth-gebland, st. n., _mingling_ or _surging waters, water-tumult_: nom. sg.
-geblond, 1374, 1594; nom. pl. -gebland, 1621.

yeth-gewin, st. n., _strife with the sea, wave-struggle, rushing of water_:
dat. sg. yeth-gewinne, 2413; gen. sg. -gewinnes, 1435.

yeth-lad, st. f., _water-journey, sea-voyage_: nom. pl. yeth-lade, 228.

yeth-laf, st. f., _water-leaving, what is left by the water (undarum
reliquiae), shore_: dat. sg. be yeth-lafe, 566.

yeth-lida, w. m., _wave-traverser, ship_: acc. sg. yeth-lidan, 198.

yeth-naca, w. m., _sea-boat_: acc. sg. [yeth-]nacan, 1904.

yeth-gesene. See eeth-gesyne.

ywan, w. v. w. acc., _to show_: pret. sg. an-syn ywde (_showed itself,
appeared_), 2835. See eawan, eowan.

ge-ywan, w. acc. of thing, dat. of pers., _to lay before, offer_: inf.,
2150.



GLOSSARY TO FINNSBURH.

abrecan, st. v., _to shatter_: part. his byrne abrocen waere (_his byrnie
was shattered_).

anyman, st. v., _to take, take away_.

ban-helm, st. m., _bone-helmet; skull_, [_shield_, Bosw.].

buruh-þelu, st. f., _castle-floor_.

celod, part, (adj.?), _keeled_, i.e. boat-shaped or hollow.

dagian, w. v., _to dawn_: ne þis ne dagiaeth eastan (_this is not dawning
from the east_).

deor-mod, adj., _brave in mood_: deor-mod haeleeth.

driht-gesieth, st m., _companion, associate_.

eastan, adv., _from the east_.

eoreth-buend, st. m., _earth-dweller, man_.

fer, st. m. _fear, terror_.

fyren, adj., _flaming, afire_: nom. f. swylce eal Finns-buruh fyrenu waere
(_as if all Finnsburh were afire_).

gehlyn, st. n., _noise, tumult_.

gellan, st. v., _to sing_ (i.e. ring or resound): pres. sg. gylleeth
graeg-hama (_the gray garment_ [byrnie] _rings_); (_the gray wolf
yelleth_?).

genesan, st. v., _to survive, recover from_: pret. pl. þa wigend hyra wunda
genaeson (_the warriors were recovering from their wounds_).

gold-hladen, adj., _laden with gold_ (wearing heavy gold ornaments).

graeg-hama, w. m., _gray garment, mail-coat_; (_wolf_?--Brooke).

gueth-wudu, st. m., _war-wood, spear_.

haeg-steald, st. m., _one who lives in his lord's house, a house-carl._

heaetho-geong, adj., _young in war._

here-sceorp, st. n., _war-dress, coat of mail_.

hleoethrian, w. v., _to speak, exclaim_: pret. sg. hleoethrode ... cyning (_the
prince exclaimed_).

hraew, st. n., _corpse_.

hror, adj., _strong_: here-sceorpum hror (_strong_ [though it was] _as
armor_, Bosw.).

lac (laeth?)? for flacor, _fluttering?_

oncweethan, st. v., _to answer_: pres. sg. scyld scefte oncwyeth (_the shield
answers the spear_).

onwacnian, w. v., _to awake, arouse one's self_: imper. pl. onwacnigeaeth...,
wigend mine (_awake, my warriors!_).

sceft (sceaft), st. m., _spear, shaft_.

sealo-brun, adj., _dusky-brown_.

sige-beorn, st. m., _victorious hero, valiant warrior_.

swaeether (swa hwaeether), pron., _which of two, which_.

swan, st. m., _swain, youth; warrior_.

sweart, adj., _swart, black_.

swet, adj., _sweet_: acc. m. swetne medo ... forgyldan (_requite the sweet
mead_, i.e. repay, by prowess in battle, the bounty of their chief).

swurd-leoma, w. m., _sword-flame, flashing of swords_.

þyrl, adj., _pierced, cloven_.

undearninga, adv., _without concealment, openly_.

wandrian, w. v., _to fly about, hover_: pret. sg. hraefn wandrode (_the
raven hovered_).

waethol, st. m., _the full moon_ [Grein]; [adj., _wandering_, Bosw.].

wael-sliht (-sleaht), st. m., _combat, deadly struggle_: gen. pl. wael-slihta
gehlyn (_the din of combats_)

wea-daed, st. f., _deed of woe_: nom. pl. arisaeth wea-daeda.

witian (weotian), w. v., _to appoint, determine_: part. þe is ... witod.

wurethlice (weorethlice), adv., _worthily, gallantly_: compar. wureth-licor.

waeg, weg, st. m., _way_.



CORRECTIONS MADE TO THE SOURCE TEXT:

ARGUMENT, recals = recalls
POEM:
ll. 131, 737 þryeth-swyeth = þryeth-swyeth
l. 256 ofest = ofost
l. 303 scionon = scionon
l. 706 buton = buton
l. 1115 at = aet
l. 1133 wieth = wieth
ll. 1304, 1560, 1616 missing caesuras supplied
l. 1436 here-strael = here-strael
l. 1642 feower- = feower
l. 1747 straele = straele
l. 1828 þywaeth = þywaeth
l. 1926 betlic = betlic
l. 2224 gesceod = gesceod
ll. 2288, 3036 was = waes
l. 2453 to = to
l. 2503 Huga = Huga
l. 2586 niethe = niethe
l. 2587 sieth = sieth
l. 2684 irenna = irenna
l. 2915 Hugas = Hugas
l. 2956 heaetho-liethendum = heaetho-liethendum
l. 3000 Þat = Þaet; feond- = feond-
l. 3056 soeth = soeth
l. 3137 Hrones = Hrones
list of names, under:
 Dene, Scedenigge = Scedenigge
 Eadgils, Ohthere = Ohthere
 Freawaru, Freawaru = Freawaru
 Hroethgar, Hroeth-gare = Hroethgare
 Hygelac, Haereeth = Haereeth
NOTES for
l. 31, of l. 31 = of l. 30
l. 1441, woeth- = waeg-
l. 1916, leofra = leofra
GLOSSARY, under headword
 aeethele, Beowulf's = Beowulf's
 an, gehwilces = gehwylces
 aeg-hwa, aegh-waes = aeghwaes
 aet-beran, beadolace = beadulace
 beadu-lac, beado- = beadu- (twice)
 beag, beages = beages
 beorh, heaford- = heafod
 beodan, leodum = leodum
 beon, cwenlic = cwenlic
 biddan, bliethne = bliethne
 bitter, straele = straele
 ge-bidan, therefor = therefore
 on-bidan, earfoethlice = earfoethlice
 brecan, letdse = let se
 burne, of of = of
 butan, swice = swice
 cempa, Huga = Huga
 ge-ceosan, usic = usic
 on-cirran, wealdendas = wealdendes
 corether, þae = þa
 cunnan, þeawe = þeaw
 cueth, wieth- = wid-
 dogor, gehwam = gehwam
 don, ymbsittend = ymbesittend; hettend = hetend; þywaeth = þywaeth
 drifan, feoran = feorran
 dryhten, freah- = frea-
 dryht-scipe, drihtscipe = drihtscype
 ge-dygan, wraecsieth = wraecsieth
 eal, oncyethethe = oncyethethe
 ealdor, herestrael = herestrael
 eacen-craeftig, iumanna = iumonna
 eofor-spreot, hocyhtum = hocyhtum
 eorlic, eorlic [ellen] = eorlic
 fah, waldreore = waeldreore
 oeth-ferian, panon = þonan
 fela, maethethum- = maethethum
 feran, waere = waere
 feond, feonda = feonda
 fleon, fenhopu = fenhopu
 floga, wieth- = wid-
 folc-toga, Hroethgar = Hroethgar
 for, wonhydum = wonhydum; handgeweorc = hondgeweorc
 fot-gemearc, long = lang
 ge-frignan, þeodcyninga = þeodcyninga
 ge-fyrethran, fratwum = fraetwum
 ge-fysan, to secanne = to seceanne
 gan, swa = swa; [or] giong = giong; flore = flore; sittan = sittan
 ge-gan, Wiglaf = Wiglaf
 gar-wiga, Wiglaf = Wiglaf
 gaest, fede- = feethe-
 gegn-cwide, þinra = þinra
 ge-gyrwan, yethlidan = yethlidan
 geoc, gast = gast
 geomore-lic, [bieth] geomorlic = geomorlic
 for-gildan, therefor = therefore
 gold-wlanc, guethrinc = guethrinc
 gretan, walgaest = waelgaest
 grim, searo-grimm = searo-grim
 habban, gecorene = gecorone
 wieth-habban, winsele = winsele
 hatan, saeliethend = saeliethend
 hatian, gueth-sceaetha = gueth-sceaetha
 har, heare = heare
 here-strael, -strael = strael
 heard, -strael = -strael; regen- = regn-
 heorte, starc- = stearc
 heoro-dreor, heoro-dreore (citation) = heoro-dreore
 hlieth, hliethu = hlietho (twice)
 hop, hop = hop (twice)
 hreow, þat = þaet
 hrof, geseah = geseah
 hwil, seo = seo
 hyran, aeghwilc = aeghwylc
 inne, abead = abead
 iren, drihtlic = dryhtlic
 laeth, gewiethru = gewidru; scynnum = scinnum
 be-lean, belean = belean
 metan, Aescheres = Aescheres
 mearcian, morhopu = morhopu
 ge-mearian, hwam = hwam
 morethor-bed, stred = stred
 mod, stieth- = stieth-
 naenig, horeth-maethum = hord-maethethum
 on, heaethe = heoethe; willen = willan
 raed, faest- = faest
 reccan, hu = hu
 ridan, gealgan = galgan
 sang, -leasne = leasne
 sceapan, Hugas = Hugas (twice)
 scanan, scionon = scionon
 scinan, scinon = scinon
 secg, synnigne = sinnigne
 ge-secan, -cyethethe = cyethethe
 ge-sigan, aetsaecce = aet saecce
 ge-slean, ge-slogan = ge-slogon
 standan, strael = strael
 stapan, furethor = furethur
 ge-steppan, Ohtheres = Ohteres
 stincan, þae = þa
 styrian, ge-wiethru = ge-widru
 sweord, maethethum- = maethethum
 ge-swican, þeodne = þeodne
 teon (w. v.), nalaes = nalas; teodan = teodan
 to, haelum = haelum; sitte = site; Eofore = Jofore
 ge-truwan, -waere = waere
 ge-twaefan, oethethe = oethethe
 þaer, snotera = snottra
 þe, gimfaestan = ginfaestan
 of-þincan, gehwam = gehwam
 ge-þolian, þat = þaet
 þu, saelran = selran
 þusend, seofon = seofan
 un-heore, -speru = -sporu
 us, aeg-hwilc = aeg-hwylc
 wacan, wocon = wocun
 werian, beaduscrud = beaduscruda
 be-werian, scynnum = scinnum
 wen, orleg = orleg; or-wena = or-wena
 weorethian, leode = leode
 willa, wyllum = willum
 wilnian, faeether = faeder
 nat, hwilc = hwylc (twice)
 ge-witan, waere = waere










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beowulf, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEOWULF ***

***** This file should be named 9700.txt or 9700.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/0/9700/

Produced by Karl Hagen and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
