The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Four Faces, by William le Queux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Four Faces
       A Mystery

Author: William le Queux

Posting Date: November 15, 2011 [EBook #9795]
Release Date: January, 2006
First Posted: October 17, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOUR FACES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charlie Kirschner and PG
Distributed Proofreaders










                             THE FOUR FACES


                               A MYSTERY

                                  BY

                            WILLIAM LE QUEUX


                               AUTHOR OF
                  "THE DEATH DOCTOR," "FATAL THIRTEEN"
                         "LYING LIPS," ETC. ETC.



CONTENTS


CHAPTER
I.      CURIOSITY IS AROUSED
II.     THE ANGEL FACES
III.    A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY
IV.     IN FULL CRY
V.      HUGESSON GASTRELL AT HOME
VI.     THE HOUSE IN GRAFTON STREET
VII.    OSBORNE'S STORY
VIII.   MORE SUSPICIONS
IX.     THE SNARE
X.      NARRATES A CONFESSION
XI.     CONCERNS MRS. STAPLETON
XII.    THE BROAD HIGHWAY
XIII.   THE BARON
XIV.    IN THE MISTS
XV.     THE MODERN VICE
XVI.    SECRETS OF DUSKY FOWL
XVII.   IS SUSPICIOUS
XVIII.  CONTAINS ANOTHER SURPRISE
XIX.    "IN THE PAPERS"
XX.     PRESTON AGAIN
XXI.    A CHANNEL MYSTERY
XXII.   THE THIN-FACED STRANGER
XXIII.  RELATES A QUEER ADVENTURE
XXIV.   IN STRANGE COMPANY
XXV.    THE GLITTERING UNDERWORLD
XXVI.   "THAT WOMAN!"
XXVII.  THE FOUR FACES
XXVIII. THE FACES UNMASKED
        CONCLUSION




THE FOUR FACES


CHAPTER I


CURIOSITY IS AROUSED

"I confess I'd like to know somethin' more about him."

"Where did you run across him first?"

"I didn't run across him; he ran across me, and in rather a curious way.
We live in Linden Gardens now, you know. Several of the houses there are
almost exactly alike, and about a month ago, at a dinner party we were
givin', a young man was shown in. His name was unknown to me, so I
supposed that he must be some friend of my wife's. Then I saw that he
was a stranger to her too, and then all at once he became very confused,
inquired if he were in Sir Harry Dawson's house--Sir Harry lives in the
house next to ours--and, findin' he was not, apologized profusely for
his mistake, and left hurriedly."

"Anyone might make a mistake of that kind in some London houses," the
second speaker said. "What is he like? Is he a gentleman?"

"Oh, quite."

"And for how long have you leased him your house in Cumberland Place?"

"Seven years, with option of renewal."

"And you mean to say you know nothing about him?"

"I won't say 'nothin',' but I know comparatively little about him.
Houston and Prince, the house agents, assure me they've made inquiries,
and that he is a rich young man whose uncle amassed a large fortune in
Tasmania--I didn't know fortunes were to be made in Tasmania, did you?
The uncle died six months ago, Houston and Prince tell me, and Hugesson
Gastrell has inherited everything he left. They say that they have
ascertained that Gastrell's parents died when he was quite a child, and
that this uncle who has died has been his guardian ever since."

"That sounds right enough. What more do you want to know?"

"It somehow seems to me very strange that I should have come to know
this man, Gastrell, without introduction of any kind--even have become
intimate with him. On the day after he had come to my house by accident,
he called to fetch a pair of gloves which, in his confusion on the
previous evenin', he had left in the hall. He asked if he might see me,
and then he again apologized for the mistake he had made the night
before. We stayed talkin' for, I suppose, fully half an hour--he's an
excellent talker, and exceedingly well-informed--and incidentally he
mentioned that he was lookin' for a house. From his description of what
he wanted it at once struck me that my Cumberland Place house would be
the very thing for him--I simply can't afford to live there now, as you
know, and for months I have been tryin' to let it. I told him about it,
and he asked if he might see it, and--well, the thing's done; he has it
now, as I say, on a seven years' lease."

"Then why worry?"

"I am not worryin'--I never worry--the most foolish thing any man can do
is to worry. All I say is--I should like to know somethin' more about
the feller. He may be quite all right--I have not the least reason for
supposin' he isn't--but my wife has taken a strong dislike to him. She
says she mistrusts him. She has said so from the beginnin'. After he had
asked to see me that mornin', the mornin' he called for his gloves, and
we had talked about the house, I invited him to lunch and introduced him
to my wife. Since then he has dined with us several times, and--well, my
wife is most insistent about it--she declares she is sure he isn't what
he seems to be, and she wanted me not to let him the house."

"Women have wonderful intuition in reading characters."

"I know they have, and that's why I feel--well, why I feel just the
least bit uneasy. What has made me feel so to-day is that I have just
heard from Sir Harry Dawson, who is on the Riviera, and he says that he
doesn't know Hugesson Gastrell, has never heard of him. There, read
his letter."

Seated in my club on a dull December afternoon, that was part of a
conversation I overheard, which greatly interested me. It interested me
because only a short time before I had, while staying in Geneva, become
acquainted at the hotel with a man named Gastrell, and I wondered if he
could be the same. From the remarks I had just heard I suspected that he
must be, for the young man in Geneva had also been an individual of
considerable personality, and a good conversationalist.

If I had been personally acquainted with either of the two speakers, who
still stood with their backs to the fire and their hands under their
coat-tails, talking now about some wonderful run with the Pytchley, I
should have told him I believed I had met the individual they had just
been discussing; but at Brooks's it is not usual for members to talk to
other members unintroduced. Therefore I remained sprawling in the big
arm-chair, where I had been pretending to read a newspaper, hoping that
something more would be said about Gastrell. Presently my patience
was rewarded.

"By the way, this feller Gastrell who's taken my house tells me he's
fond of huntin'," the first speaker--whom I knew to be Lord Easterton, a
man said to have spent three small fortunes in trying to make a big
one--remarked. "Said somethin' about huntin' with the Belvoir or the
Quorn. Shouldn't be surprised if he got put up for this club later."

"Should you propose him if he asked you?"

"Certainly, provided I found out all about him. He's a gentleman
although he is an Australian--he told Houston and Prince he was born and
educated in Melbourne, and went to his uncle in Tasmania immediately he
left school; but he hasn't a scrap of that ugly Australian accent; in
fact, he talks just like you or me or anybody else, and would pass for
an Englishman anywhere."

Without a doubt that must be the man I had met, I reflected as the two
speakers presently sauntered out of the room, talking again of hunting,
one of the principal topics of conversation in Brooks's. I, Michael
Berrington, am a man of leisure, an idler I am ashamed to say, my
parents having brought me up to be what is commonly and often so
erroneously termed "a gentleman," and left me, when they died, heir to a
cosy little property in Northamptonshire, and with some L80,000 safely
invested. As a result I spend many months of the year in travel, for I
am a bachelor with no ties of any kind, and the more I travel and the
more my mind expands, the more cosmopolitan I become and the more
inclined I feel to kick against silly conventions such as this one at
Brooks's which prevented my addressing Lord Easterton or his friend--men
I see in the club every day I am there, and who know me quite well by
sight, though we only stare stonily at each other--and asking more
about Gastrell.

So Lady Easterton had taken an instinctive dislike to this young man,
Hugesson Gastrell, and openly told her husband that she mistrusted him.
Now, that was curious, I reflected, for I had spoken to him several
times while in Geneva, and though his personality had appealed to
me, yet--

Well, there was something about him that puzzled me, something--I cannot
define what it was, for it was more like a feeling or sensation which
came over me while I was with him--a feeling that he was not what he
appeared to be, and that I saw, so to speak, only his outer surface.

"Hullo, Michael!"

The greeting cut my train of thought, and, screwing myself round in the
big arm-chair, I looked up.

"Why, Jack!" I exclaimed, "I had no idea you were in England. I thought
you were bagging rhinoceroses and things in Nigeria or somewhere."

"So I have been. Got back yesterday. Sorry I am back, to tell you the
truth," and he glanced significantly towards the window. A fine, wetting
drizzle was falling; dozens of umbrellas passed to and fro outside; the
street lamps were lit, though it was barely three o'clock, and in the
room that we were in the electric lights were switched on. The sky was
the colour of street mud, through which the sun, a huge, blood-red disc,
strove to pierce the depressing murk of London's winter atmosphere,
thereby creating a lurid and dismal effect.

Jack Osborne is a man I rather like, in spite of the fact that his sole
aim in life is to kill things. When he isn't shooting "hippos" and
"rhinos" and bears and lions in out-of-the-way parts of the world, he is
usually plastering pheasants in the home covers, or tramping the fields
and moors where partridges and grouse abound.

"Had a good time?" I asked some moments later.

"Ripping," he answered, "quite ripping," and he went on to tell me the
number of beasts he had slain, particulars about them and the way he had
outwitted them. I managed to listen for ten minutes or so without
yawning, and then suddenly he remarked:

"I met a man on board ship, on the way home, who said he knew
you--feller named Gastrell. Said he met you in Geneva, and liked you
like anything. Struck me as rather a rum sort--what? Couldn't quite make
him out. Who is he and what is he? What's he do?"

"I know as little about him as you do," I answered. "I know him only
slightly--we were staying at the same hotel in Geneva. I heard Lord
Easterton, who was in here half an hour ago, saying he had let his house
in Cumberland Place to a man named Gastrell--Hugesson Gastrell. I wonder
if it is the man I met in Geneva and that you say you met on board ship.
When did you land?"

"Yesterday, at Southampton. Came by the _Masonic_ from Capetown."

"And where did Gastrell come from?"

"Capetown too. I didn't notice him until we were near the end of the
voyage. He must have remained below a good deal, I think."

I paused, thinking.

"In that case," I said, "the Gastrell who has leased Easterton's house
can't be the man you and I have met, because, from what Easterton said,
he saw his man quite recently. Ah, here is Lord Easterton," I added, as
the door opened and he re-entered. "You know him, don't you?"

"Quite well," Jack Osborne answered, "Don't you? Come, I'll introduce
you, and then we'll clear this thing up."

It was not until Osborne and Lord Easterton had talked for some time
about shooting in general, and about "hippo" and "rhino" and "'gator"
killing in particular, and I had been forced to listen to a repetition
of incidents to do with the sport that Jack Osborne had obtained in
Nigeria and elsewhere, that Jack presently said:

"Berrington tells me, Easterton, he heard you say that you have let your
house to a man named Gastrell, and we were wondering if he is the
Gastrell we both know--a tall man of twenty-eight or so, with dark hair
and very good-looking, queer kind of eyes--what?"

"Oh, so you know him?" Easterton exclaimed. "That's good. I want to find
out who he is, where he comes from, in fact all about him. I have a
reason for wanting to know."

"He came from Capetown with me--landed at Southampton yesterday,"
Osborne said quickly.

"Capetown? Arrived yesterday? Oh, then yours must be a different man.
Tell me what he is like."

Osborne gave a detailed description.

"And at the side of his chin," he ended, "he's got a little scar, sort
of scar you see on German students' faces, only quite small--doesn't
disfigure him a bit."

"But this is extraordinary," Lord Easterton exclaimed. "You have
described my man to the letter--even to the scar. Can they be twins?
Even twins, though, wouldn't have the same scar, the result probably of
some accident. You say your man landed only yesterday?"

"Yes, we came off the ship together."

"Then he was on board on--let me think--ten days or so ago?"

"Oh, yes."

"It's most singular, this apparent likeness between the two men."

"It is--if they really are alike. When shall you see your man again?"
Osborne inquired.

"I have this moment had a letter from him," Easterton answered. "He asks
me to lunch with him at the Cafe Royal to-morrow. Look here, I'll tell
you what I'll do--I'll say I'm engaged or somethin', and ask him to dine
here one evenin'. Then if you will both give me the pleasure of your
company, we shall at once find out if your Gastrell and mine are the
same--they can't be the same, of course, as your man was in the middle
of the ocean on the day mine was here in London; I mean we'll find out
if he has a twin brother."

"Have you met his wife?" Jack Osborne inquired carelessly, as he lit a
long cigar.

"Phew! Yes. I should say so. One of the most gloriously beautiful women
I have ever seen in my life. She was on board with him, and I believe
everybody on the ship was head over ears in love with her. I know
I was."

"Ah, that settles it," Easterton said. "My man is a bachelor."

Osborne smiled in a curious way, and blew a cloud of smoke towards the
ceiling without saying anything.

"Why, what is it?" Easterton asked, noticing the smile.

"Oh, nothing. A little thought that crept into my brain, that's all."

"Tell us what your Gastrell's wife is like," Easterton pursued.

"Like? What is she not like! Think of all the most lovely girls and
women you have ever set eyes on, and roll them into one, and still you
won't get the equal of Jasmine Gastrell. What is she like? By heaven,
you might as well ask me to describe the taste of nectar!"

"Dark or fair?"

"Both."

"Oh, nonsense."

"It isn't nonsense, Easterton. She has the strangest eyes--they are
really green, I suppose, but they look quite blue in some lights, and in
other lights deep purple. They are the most extraordinary eyes I have
ever seen; a woman with eyes like that must have tremendous intelligence
and quite exceptional personality. It's useless for me to try to
describe the rest of her face; it's too lovely for anything."

"And her hair?" Easterton asked. "Has she dark hair or fair?"

"Both."

"Ah, Jack, stop rottin'," Easterton exclaimed, laughing. "What is the
colour of the hair of this woman who has so set your heart on end?"

"It may be auburn; it may be chestnut-brown; it may be red for all I
know, but I am hanged if I can say for certain which it is, or if it's
only one colour or all three shades. But whatever it is it's perfectly
lovely hair, and she has any amount of it. I wouldn't mind betting that
when she lets it down it falls quite to her feet and hangs all round her
like a cloak."

"I should like to meet this goddess, Jack," Easterton said, his
curiosity aroused. "Though you are so wedded to hippos, and rhinos, and
'gators and things, you don't seem entirely to have lost your sense of
appreciation of 'woman beautiful.' Where are she and her
husband staying?"

"I've not the least idea."

"Didn't they tell you their plans?"

"They said nothing whatever about themselves, though I tried once or
twice to draw them out. In that respect they were extraordinarily
reserved. In every other way they were delightful--especially Mrs.
Gastrell, though I was greatly attracted by Gastrell too, when I came to
know him towards the end of the voyage."




CHAPTER II


THE ANGEL FACES

Hugesson Gastrell had accepted Lord Easterton's invitation to dine at
the club, and the three men were seated near the fire as I entered,
Easterton and Jack Osborne on one of the large settees, their visitor
facing them in an arm-chair, with his back to me. I went towards them
across the big room, apologizing for my unpunctuality, for I was nearly
ten minutes late. To my surprise they remained silent; even Easterton
did not rise, or greet me in any way. He looked strangely serious, and
so did Jack, as a rule the cheeriest of mortals.

"I am dreadfully sorry for being so late," I exclaimed, thinking that my
unpunctuality must have given them offence. I was about to invent some
elaborate excuse to account for my "delay," when the man seated with his
back to me suddenly rose, and, turning abruptly, faced me.

I recognized him at once. It was Gastrell, whom I had met at the Hotel
Metropol in Geneva. As he stood there before me, with his back half
turned to the light of the big bay window, there could be no mistaking
him. Again I was struck by his remarkable appearance--the determined,
clean-cut features, the straight, short nose, the broad forehead, the
square-shaped chin denoting rigid strength of purpose. Once more I
noticed the cleft in his chin--it was quite deep. His thick hair was
dark, with a slight kink in it behind the ears. But perhaps the
strangest, most arresting thing about Gastrell's face was his
eyes--daring eyes of a bright, light blue, such as one sees in some
Canadians, the bold, almost hard eyes of a man who is accustomed to
gazing across far distances of sunlit snow, who habitually looks up into
vast, pale blue skies--one might have imagined that his eyes had caught
their shade. He wore upon his watch-chain a small gold medallion, a
trinket which had attracted my attention before. It was about the size
of a sovereign, and embossed upon it were several heads of chubby
cupids--four sweet little faces.

At first glance at him a woman might have said mentally, "What nice
eyes!" At the second, she would probably have noticed a strange
thing--the eyes were quite opaque; they seemed to stare rather than look
at you, there was no depth whatever in them. Certainly there was no
guessing at Gastrell's character from his eyes--you could take it or
leave it, as you pleased, for the eyes gave you no help. The glance was
perfectly direct, bright and piercing, but there could be absolutely no
telling if the man when speaking were lying to you or not. The hard,
blue eyes never changed, never deepened, nor was there any emotion
in them.

To sum up, the effect the man's personality produced was that of an
extraordinarily strong character carving its way undaunted through every
obstacle to its purpose; but whether the trend of that character were
likely to lean to the side of truth and goodness, or to that of lying
and villainy, there was no guessing.

All these points I observed again--I say "again," for they had struck me
forcibly the first time I had met him in Geneva--as he stood there
facing me, his gaze riveted on mine. We must have stayed thus staring at
each other for several moments before anybody spoke. Then it was Lord
Easterton who broke the silence.

"Well?" he asked.

I glanced at him quickly, uncertain which of us he had addressed. After
some instants' pause he repeated:

"Well?"

"Are you speaking to me?" I asked quickly.

"Of course," he replied, almost sharply. "You don't seem to know each
other after all."

"Oh, but yes," I exclaimed, and I turned quickly to Gastrell,
instinctively extending my hand to him as I did so. "We met in Geneva."

He still stood looking at me, motionless. Then gradually an expression,
partly of surprise, partly of amusement, crept into his eyes.

"You mistake me for someone else, I am afraid," he said, and his voice
was the voice of the man I had met in Geneva--that I would have sworn to
in any court of law, "It is rather remarkable," he went on, his eyes
still set on mine, "that Mr. Osborne, to whom Lord Easterton has just
introduced me, also thought he and I had met before."

"But I am certain I did meet you," Osborne exclaimed in a curious tone,
from where he sat. "I am quite positive we were together on board the
_Masonic_, unless you have a twin brother, and even then--"

He stopped, gazing literally open-mouthed at Hugesson Gastrell, while I,
standing staring at the man, wondered if this were some curious dream
from which I should presently awaken, for there could be no two
questions about it--the man before me was the Gastrell I had met in
Geneva and conversed with on one or two occasions for quite a long time.
Beside, he wore the little medallion of the Four Faces.

Easterton looked ill at ease; so did Osborne; and certainly I felt
considerably perturbed. It was unnatural, uncanny, this resemblance. And
the resemblance as well as the name must, it would seem, be shared by
three men at least. For here was Lord Easterton's friend, Hugesson
Gastrell, whom Easterton had told us he had met frequently in London
during the past month; here was Jack Osborne claiming to be acquainted
with a man named Gastrell, whom he had met on his way home from Africa,
and who, as he put it to us afterwards, was "the dead facsimile" of
Easterton's guest; and here was I with a distinct recollection of a man
called Gastrell who--well, the more I stared at Easterton's guest the
more mystified I felt at this Hugesson Gastrell's declaring that he was
not my Geneva companion; indeed that we had never met before, and that
he had never been in Geneva.

The dinner was not a great success. Gastrell talked at considerable
length on all sorts of subjects, talked, too, in a most interesting and
sometimes very amusing way; yet all the time the thought that was in
Osborne's mind was in my mind also--it was impossible, he was thinking,
that this man seated at dinner with us could be other than the
individual he had met on board ship; it was impossible, I was thinking,
that this man seated at dinner with us could be other than the
individual I had met in Geneva.

Easterton, a great talker in the club, was particularly silent. He too
was puzzled; worse than that--he felt, I could see, anxious and
uncomfortable. He had let his house to this man--the lease was already
signed--and now his tenant seemed to be, in some sense, a man
of mystery.

We sat in the big room with the bay window, after dinner, until about
half-past ten, when Gastrell said he must be going. During the whole
time he had been with us he had kept us entertained by his interesting
conversation, full of quaint reminiscences, and touched with flashes
of humour.

"I hope we shall see a great deal of each other when I am settled in
Cumberland Place," he said, as he prepared to leave. The remark, though
spoken to Easterton, had been addressed to us all, and we made some
conventional reply in acknowledgment.

"And if, later, I decide to join this club," he said presently, "you
won't mind proposing me, will you, Easterton?"

"I? Er--oh, of course, not in the least!" Easterton answered awkwardly,
taken off his guard. "But it will take you a good time to get in, you
know," he added as an afterthought, hopeful that the prospect of delay
might cause Gastrell to change his mind. "Two, even three years, some
men have to wait."

"That won't matter," Gastrell said carelessly, as the hall porter helped
him on with his coat. "I can join some other club meanwhile, though I
draw the line at pot-houses. Well, good night to you all, and you must
all come to my house-warming--a sort of reception I'm going to give. I
ought to be settled into the house in a month. And I hope," he added
lightly, addressing Jack Osborne and myself, "you won't run across any
more of my 'doubles.' I don't like the thought of being mistaken for
other men!"

The door of the taxi shut with a bang. In the hall, where the tape
machines were busy, Osborne and I stood looking at each other
thoughtfully. Presently Osborne spoke.

"What do you make of it?" he asked abruptly. "I am as certain that is
the fellow who was with me on board ship as I am that I am
standing here."

"And I am equally positive," I answered, "he's the man I met in Geneva.
It's impossible there could be two individuals so absolutely
identical--I tell you it's not possible."

Osborne paused for some moments, thinking.

"Berrington," he said suddenly.

"Yes? What?" I asked, taken aback at his change of tone.

He took a step forward and laid his hand upon my shoulder.

"Berrington," he repeated--and in his eyes there was a singular
expression--"I have an idea."

He turned to a page who was standing near.

"Boy," he said sharply, "what address did that gentleman who has just
gone tell you to give to his driver?"

"He told the driver himself, sir," the boy answered, "but I heard the
address he gave, sir."

"What was it?"

"Three forty, Maresfield Gardens, sir. It's near Swiss Cottage--up
Fitzjohn's Avenue on the right."

Osborne turned to me quickly.

"Come into this room," he said. "There is something I want to ask you.
The place is empty, and we shall not be disturbed."

When he had closed the door, and glanced about him to make sure that we
were alone, he said in a low voice:

"Look here, Mike, I tell you again, I have an idea: I wonder if you will
fall in with it. I have watched that fellow Gastrell pretty closely all
the evening; I am rather a good judge of men, you know, and I believe
him to be an impostor of some kind--I can't say just yet of what kind.
Anyway, he is the man I met on the _Masonic_; he can deny it as much as
he likes--he is. Either he is impersonating some other man, or some
other man is impersonating him. Now listen. I am going to that address
in Maresfield Gardens that he gave to his taxi-driver. I am going to
find out if he lives there, or what he is doing there. What I want to
know is--Will you come with me?"

"Good heavens, Jack!" I exclaimed, "what an extraordinary thing to do.
But what will you say when you get there? Supposing he does live
there--or, for that matter, supposing he doesn't--what reason will you
give for calling at the house?"

"Oh, I'll invent some reason quick enough, but I want someone to be with
me. Will you come? Will you or won't you?"

I glanced up at the clock. It wanted twenty minutes to eleven.

"Do you mean now? Do you intend to go at this time of the night?"

"I intend to go at once--as fast as a taxi will take me there," he
answered.

I paused, undecided. It seemed such a strange thing to do, under the
circumstances; but then, as I knew, Jack Osborne had always been fond of
doing strange things. Though a member of Brooks's, he was unconventional
in the extreme.

"Yes, I will," I said, the originality of the idea suddenly appealing to
me. In point of fact I, too, mistrusted this man Gastrell. Though he had
looked me so straight in the eyes when, two hours before, he had calmly
assured me that I was mistaken in believing him to be "his namesake in
Geneva," as he put it; still, as I say, I felt convinced he was the
same man.

"Good," Osborne answered in a tone of satisfaction. "Come, we will start
at once."

A strange feeling of repressed excitement obsessed me as our taxi passed
up Bond Street, turned into Oxford Street, then to the right into
Orchard Street, and sped thence by way of Baker Street past Lord's
cricket ground and up the Finchley Road. What would happen when we
reached Maresfield Gardens? Would the door be opened by a stolid footman
or by some frigid maidservant who would coldly inform us that "Mr.
Gastrell was not at home"; or should we be shown in, and, if we were
shown in, what excuse would Jack Osborne make for calling so late at
night? I cannot say that I felt in the least anxious, however, for
Osborne is a man who has knocked about the world and seen many queer
sides of life, and who never, under any circumstances, is at a loss
how to act.

I glanced at my watch as our taxi turned into Maresfield Gardens. It was
ten minutes past eleven. At the house indicated half-way up the hill the
taxi suddenly pulled up.

Osborne got out and pressed the electric bell-push. As I looked up at
the windows, I noticed that nowhere was any light visible. Nor was there
a light in the ground-floor windows.

"I believe everybody is in bed," I said to him, when the bell remained
unanswered. Without replying, he pressed the push again, and kept his
finger on it.

Still no one came.

"We'd better call to-morrow," I suggested, when he had rung a third time
with the same result.

The words had hardly left my lips, when we heard the door-chain rattle.
Then the bolts were pulled back, and a moment later the door was
carefully drawn open to the length of its chain.

Inside all was darkness, nor was anybody visible.

"What do you want?" a woman's voice inquired.

The voice had a most pleasant _timbre_; also the speaker was obviously a
lady. She did not sound in the least alarmed, but there was a note of
surprise in the tone.

"Has Mr. Gastrell come home yet?" Osborne asked.

"Not yet. Do you want to see him?"

"Yes. He dined at Brooks's Club this evening with Lord Easterton. Soon
after he had left, a purse was found, and, as nobody in the club claimed
it, I concluded that it must be his, so I have brought it back."

"That is really very good of you, Mr. Osborne," the hidden speaker
answered. "If you will wait a moment I will let you in. Are you alone?"

"No, I have a friend with me. But who are you? How do you know my name?"

There was no answer. The door was shut quietly. Then we heard the sound
of the chain being removed.

By the time Jack Osborne had paid our driver, and dismissed the taxi,
the door had been opened sufficiently wide to admit us. We entered, and
at once the door was shut.

We were now in inky blackness.

"Won't you switch on the light?" Osborne asked, when a minute or so had
elapsed, and we remained in total darkness.

Nobody answered, and we waited, wondering. Fully another minute passed,
and still we stood there.

I felt Osborne touch me. Then, coming close to me, he whispered in my
ear:

"Strike a match, Mike; I haven't one."

I felt in my pockets. I had not one either. I was about to tell him so
when something clicked behind us, and the hall was flooded with light.

Never before had I beheld, and I doubt if I shall ever behold again, a
woman as lovely as the tall, graceful being upon whom our eyes rested at
that instant. In height quite five foot nine, as she stood there beneath
the glow of the electrolier in the luxurious hall, in her dinner dress,
the snowy slope of the shoulders and the deep, curved breast, strong,
yet all so softly, delicately rounded, gleamed like rosy alabaster in
the reflection from the red-shaded light above her.

Our eyes wandered from exquisite figure to exquisite face--and there was
no sense of disappointment. For the face was as nearly perfect as a
woman's may be upon this earth of imperfections. The uplift of the brow,
the curve of the cheek to the rounded chin, the noble sweep of delicate,
dark eyebrows were extraordinarily beautiful. Her hair was "a net for
the sunlight," its colour that of a new chestnut in the spring when the
sun shines hotly upon it, making it glow and shimmer and glisten with
red and yellow and deepest browns. Now it was drawn about her head in
shining twists, and across the front and rather low down on the brow was
a slim and delicate wreath of roses and foliage in very small diamonds
beautifully set in platinum. The gleam of the diamonds against the
red-brown of the wonderful hair was an effect impossible to
describe--yet one felt that the hair would have been the same miracle
without it.

"Mrs. Gastrell! Why, I didn't recognize your voice," I had heard Osborne
exclaim in a tone of amazement just after the light had been turned on.
but my attention had been so centred upon the Vision standing there
before us that I had hardly noticed the remark, or the emphasis with
which it was uttered. I suppose half a minute must have passed before
anybody spoke again, and then it was the woman who broke the silence.

"Will you show me the purse?" she asked, holding out her hand for it and
addressing Osborne.

On the instant he produced his own and gave it to her. She glanced at
it, then handed it back.

"It is not his," she said quietly. Her gaze rested steadily upon
Osborne's face for some moments, then she said:

"How exceedingly kind of you to come all this way, and in the middle of
the night, just to find out if a purse picked up at your club happens to
belong to the guest of a friend of yours."

In her low, soft voice there was a touch of irony, almost of mockery.
Looking at her now, I felt puzzled. Was she what she appeared to be, or
was this amazing beauty of hers a cloak, a weapon if you will, perhaps
the most dangerous weapon of a clever, scheming woman? Easterton had
told us that Gastrell was a bachelor. Gastrell had declared that he had
never before met either Jack Osborne or myself. Yet here at the address
that Gastrell had given to the taxi-driver was the very woman the man
calling himself Gastrell, with whom Osborne had returned from Africa,
had passed off as his wife.

"My husband isn't in at present," she said calmly, a moment later, "but
I expect him back at any minute. Won't you come in and wait for him?"

Before either of us could answer she had walked across the hall,
unlocked and opened a door, and switched on the light in the room.

Mechanically we followed her. As we entered, a strange, heavy perfume of
some subtle Eastern scent struck my nostrils--I had noticed it in the
hall, but in this room it was pungent, oppressive, even overpowering.
The apartment, I noticed, was luxuriously furnished. What chiefly
attracted my attention, however, were the pictures on the walls.
Beautifully executed, the subjects were, to say the least, peculiar. The
fire in the grate still burned brightly. Upon a table were two syphons
in silver stands, also decanters containing spirits, and several
tumblers. Some of the tumblers had been used. As I sank, some moments
later, into an easy chair, I felt that its leather-covered arms were
warm, as if someone had just vacated it.

And yet the door of this room had been locked. Also, when we had
arrived, no light had been visible in any of the windows of the house,
and the front door had been chained and bolted.

"Make yourselves quite at home," our beautiful hostess said, and, as she
spoke, she placed a box of cigars, newly opened, upon the table at my
elbow. "I am sorry," she added, "that I must leave you now."

There was a curious expression in her eyes as she smiled down at us, an
expression that later I came to know too well. Then, turning, she swept
gracefully out of the room, closing the door behind her.

I looked across at Osborne. For some moments neither of us spoke. The
mysterious house was still as death.

"Well, Jack," I said lightly, though somehow I felt uneasy, "what do you
make of it, old man?"

"It is just as I thought," he answered, taking a cigar out of the box
and beginning to trim it.

"How do you mean--'just as you thought'?" I asked, puzzled.

"Gastrell is an impostor, and--and that isn't his wife."

He did not speak again for some moments, being busily occupied in
lighting his long cigar. Presently he leaned back, then blew a great
cloud of smoke towards the ceiling.

Suddenly we heard a click, like the wooden lid of a box suddenly shut.

"Hullo!" he exclaimed suddenly, "what's that?"

"What's what?"

"Why! Look!" he gasped.

His gaze was set upon something in the shadow of a small table in a
corner of the room--something on the floor. In silence, now, we both
stood staring at it, for Osborne had risen suddenly. Slowly it moved. It
was gradually gliding along the floor, with a sound like paper being
pushed along a carpet. Whence it came, where it began and where it
ended, we could not see, for the shadow it was in was very deep. Nor was
its colour in the least discernible.

All we could make out was that some long, sinuous, apparently endless
Thing was passing along the room, close to the wall farthest from us,
coming from under the sofa and disappearing beneath the table.

All at once Osborne sprang towards me with an exclamation of alarm, and
I felt his grip tighten upon my arm.

"Good God!" he cried.

An instant later a broad, flat head slowly reared itself from beneath
the red table-cover which hung down almost to the floor, rose higher and
higher until the black, beady, merciless eyes were set upon mine, and in
that brief instant of supreme suspense my attention became riveted on
the strange, slate-grey mark between and just behind the reptile's cruel
eyes. Then, as its head suddenly shot back, Osborne dashed towards
the door.

Once, twice, three times he pulled frantically at the handle with all
his force.

"Good God! Berrington," he cried, his face blanched to the lips, "we're
locked in!"

Almost as he spoke, the serpent with head extended swept forward towards
us, along the floor.

I held my breath. Escape from its venomous fangs was impossible.

We had been trapped!




CHAPTER III


A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY

With a shriek of alarm I leapt to the further side of the table which
stood in the middle of the room, and at that moment hurried footsteps
became audible.

Our wild shouts for help had evidently been heard, for someone was
hurrying down the bare oak stairs into the hall.

"Hang this confounded lock--it catches!" we heard a voice exclaim as the
handle turned. Then an instant later the door was flung open, and
Gastrell stood before us.

"I am dreadfully sorry, you fellows," he said apologetically, "that you
should have been alarmed in this way, because I can assure you that my
tame cobra, 'Maharaja,' is quite harmless--look at him now," and we saw
that the horrid reptile had swung round the instant its master had
entered, and was sliding towards his feet. "He's a pet of mine--I
brought him home with me, and he follows me like a dog--no, you needn't
be in the least nervous," he added quickly, seeing that I instinctively
edged away as the reptile passed. "I'm awfully sorry to have kept you
waiting. I must apologize, too, for that confounded door--I myself got
locked in here the other day. My wife told you I was out, but I was not.
I came in by the side door, and she didn't know I was back, because I
went straight upstairs. If you'll wait a moment I'll take our friend
'Maharaja' out."

He left the room, and the snake slid rapidly along the floor after him,
almost, as he had said, like a dog following his steps.

"A nice cheerful pet to keep," I remarked, annoyed at my experience; but
at that moment the mysterious Gastrell bustled in alone.

"So sorry," he said, and, after thanking us for coming out so far to
ascertain if he had lost his purse, he pulled up a chair, seated himself
between us, lit a big cigar, and helped us to whiskey from a
silver tantalus.

"You had better add the soda yourselves," he said. "And now there is
something I want to say to you both. You must have been surprised at my
declaring so emphatically this evening that I had not met either of you
before--eh?"

"I can answer for myself," Osborne exclaimed quickly. "Are you going to
admit, after all, that you were on the _Masonic_?"

"Of course! Who else could it have been? Any more," he added, addressing
me, than it could have been someone other than me whom you met
in Geneva?"

"Then why did you deny it?" Osborne said rather irritably, looking hard
at him with an expression of disapproval and mistrust, while my eyes
wandered to that little gold medallion upon his chain.

"Because I had to,--that is, it was expedient that I should," was his
reply. "I have a reason for not wanting it to be generally known that I
am married,--least of all did I want Easterton, whose house I have just
leased, to know me to be a married man; indeed, I told him some weeks
ago that I was a bachelor--I had to, for reasons which I can't reveal
at present."

He stopped speaking, and we watched him narrowly.

"Still," I remarked, "I don't see how you could have been on board ship
in the middle of the ocean, and at the same time in London."

"I didn't say I was. I wasn't. I was in London a fortnight ago, and
spent some hours with Lord Easterton. On the same day I sailed for
Madeira, where I joined my wife on the homeward-bound _Masonic_. Think,
Mr. Osborne," he ended, his curious gaze set on my companion's face,
"think when we first met on board. It was not before the ship reached
Madeira, surely."

Jack Osborne reflected.

"By Jove, no!" he suddenly exclaimed. "How odd I should all along have
thought you had embarked at Capetown with the rest of us. But Mrs.
Gastrell came from the Cape, surely?"

"She did, and the name 'Mr. Gastrell' was also in the passenger list,
because a cousin of mine should have been on board. At the eleventh hour
he was prevented from sailing, and it was upon receipt of a cable from
him that I decided to catch the next boat to the Canaries and there
meet my wife."

I admit that, as he paused, I felt rather "small"; and I believe Osborne
felt the same. We had driven from the club right out here to Swiss
Cottage, and on the way we had conjured up in our imaginations all sorts
of mysterious happenings, even possible intrigues; and now the whole
affair proved to have been "quite ordinary," with a few commonplace
incidents to relieve its monotony--notably the incident of the
giant cobra.

True, there was the mystery of the locked door. But then, had it really
been locked? I had not myself tried to open it, and now as I thought
about it, it seemed to me quite possible that Jack Osborne might, in the
excitement of the moment, have failed to turn the handle sufficiently,
and so have believed that the door was locked when it was not. Again we
had Gastrell's assurance that he had found himself locked in one day. As
for his declaration to Easterton that he was not the Gastrell whom
Osborne had met on the _Masonic_, it was clear now that he had some
secret reason for wishing to pass in London as a bachelor, and as
Osborne had told Easterton that the Gastrell on the _Masonic_ had told
him that he had met me in Geneva, naturally Gastrell had been driven--in
order to conceal his identity--to maintain that he had never before met
me either.

Our host insisted upon our taking another of his very excellent cigars
before we left,--it was close upon one o'clock when we rose to go. He
rang up a taxi for us, helped us on with our coats, accompanied us to
the door, and shook hands with each of us most cordially.

"What do you make of it, Michael?" Osborne asked, when we had remained
silent in the swift-travelling taxi for five minutes or more, and were
approaching Marlboro' Road Station."

"Nothing," I answered bluntly. "I don't know what to make of it."

"Suspect anything?"

"Yes--and no."

"That's just how I feel, and yet--"

"Well?"

"I mistrust him. I don't know why, but I do. I mistrust them both.
There's something queer happening in that house. I am certain there is."

"You can't be certain, as you don't know."

"My suspicions are so strong that they amount to convictions."

"So I think, too. And those dirty tumblers on the tray, and the hot
arm-chair I sat down in--Jack, I believe there were a lot of people in
that house, hidden away somewhere, all the time we were there. I believe
Gastrell admitted his identity only because he was obliged to. Our
calling like that, so unexpectedly, and being admitted by his wife--if
she is his wife--disconcerted him and took him unawares. I can't think
why she admitted us--especially I can't think why she kept us so long in
the dark in the hall before she switched on the light. By Jove! What a
stunning woman!"

"She is--but crafty. I thought that when I met her on board ship. And
those eyes of hers. Phew! They seem to read right into one's soul, and
discover one's secret thoughts." He stopped for an instant, then added,
meditatively, "I wonder what makes Gastrell keep that horrible cobra
as a pet."

I yawned, and we relapsed into silence. Then gradually my thoughts
drifted--drifted away from London, far from crowds and hustle, the
rumble of motor 'buses and the hootings and squawkings of ears, to a
peaceful, rural solitude.

I was in Berkshire. Down in the picturesque valley into which I gazed
from the summit of a wooded slope stood a Manor house, ivy-grown, old,
very beautiful Facing it an enormous plateau, hewn out of the Down, had
been converted to various uses--there were gardens, shrubberies, tennis
lawns. Lower came terrace after terrace of smoothly mown grass, each
with its little path and borders of shrubs, interspersed with the finest
Wellingtonias in the county, tapering gracefully to heaven,
copper-beeches and grand oaks.

The house itself was very long and low, its frontage white, mellowed
with age, and broken up by old-fashioned, latticed windows which gleamed
blue and grey in the translucent, frosted air. The roof of the Manor
boasted a mass of beautiful red-brown gables, many half hidden from
sight by the wealth of ivy; last summer also by a veritable tangle of
Virginia creeper and crimson rambler, now sleeping their winter sleep.

My thoughts wandered on. They travelled with extraordinary rapidity, as
thought does, picture after picture rising into the vision of my
imagination like the scenes in a kaleidoscopic cinema.

Now I was seated in the old Manor. I could see the room distinctly. It
was a small boudoir or ante-room opening into the large drawing-room--a
cosy, homely place, its low, latticed windows, divided into four,
opening outwards on to garden and terraces, its broad, inviting
window-seat comfortably cushioned. Nearly all the furniture was quite
old, dark oak, elaborately carved--writing-table, high-backed chairs, an
old French "armoury" in the corner; but near the hearth there were two
or three deep, modern armchairs of peculiarly restful character, covered
with exquisite flowered chintzes.

This vision deepened. I started. The door of the quiet room had suddenly
opened, and, humming a gay little French air, a young girl had
entered--fresh, exquisite, like a breath of early Springtime itself in
the midst of Winter. With her deep eyes, so soft and brown, her skin of
a healthy olive pallor, the cheeks just flushed with crimson, and her
nimbus of light brown hair through which the golden threads strayed so
charmingly, she made a perfect picture standing there in her long gown
of sapphire-blue velvet.

The soft contours of her young face were outlined against a tall screen
embroidered gorgeously with silken peacocks, before which she stopped to
lay down upon a small table the sheaf of red and brown and golden
chrysanthemums which she carried in her arms.

My pulses throbbed as they always did in her presence, or when, indeed,
she so much as crossed my daydreams, as at this moment. For this girl
was Dulcie Challoner--the woman who was fast becoming the one woman in
the world to me, and thus had I seen her enter that very room when last
I had spent a week-end at Holt Manor, four miles from the little village
of Holt Stacey--and that happened to have been only three weeks from the
present moment.

The taxi stopped abruptly, shattering my dreams. We had reached the
club. Some letters were awaiting me. My spirits rose as I recognized the
handwriting on one of them.

Dulcie wrote to say that her father hoped, if I were not "already
booked," I would spend Christmas with them.

I was "already booked." I had accepted an invitation a month before to
dine on Christmas Day with an hysterical aunt from whom I had
expectations. Well, the expectations must take their chance. Then and
there I sat down and wrote a long letter to Dulcie saying what joy the
contents of her letter had given me, and a brief line to my aunt
explaining that "unavoidable circumstances had arisen" which
necessitated my cancelling my promise to come to her, much as I
regretted doing so.

Snow was falling slowly and persistently, as it had done all the
afternoon, when, about ten days later, I arrived at the little station
of Holt Stacey, the nearest to Holt Manor. The motor brougham awaited
my rather late train, and I was quickly installed among the fur rugs in
its cosy interior and being whirled along the silent whiteness of the
narrow lanes between the station and my destination. The weather was
very cold, and I saw through the windows of the car that every branch
and twig had its thick covering of pure white snow, while the thatched
roofs of the tiny cottages we passed were heavily laden. By four o'clock
in the afternoon most of the cottage windows were lit up, and the glow
of the oil lamps shining through tiny panes on to the gleaming carpet of
snow without, produced a most picturesque effect.

Now we were purring up the hilly drive; then rounding the sweep to the
hall door. The man did not have to ring. Before he could get off the box
I heard heavy footsteps leaping down the stairs three at a time and
flying across the hall. The door was flung open, and a wild war-whoop
from Dick announced my arrival to whoever cared to know of it.

"Good old sport!" shouted Dick, snatching the travelling-rug from my
arm, after telling the footman behind him to "take Mr. Berrington's
things to the green room in the west wing," and almost pushing me into
the hall. "Good old sport! You're awfully late. We've all done tea."

I told him we had been quite half an hour after the scheduled time in
starting from Paddington, and that the crowds had been enormous.

"Just what I told Dulcie," he exclaimed. "You don't want to see her, I
suppose? What a beastly long time it seems since you were here! Three
weeks, isn't it, since I was home, ill?"

In vain I endeavoured to quiet Dick's ringing voice as a girlish, lithe
figure appeared between the curtains which divided the stairs from the
hall, a figure clad in soft rosy silk with a little lacy tea-jacket over
it, and with golden-brown hair waving naturally about a broad, white
forehead, with starry brown eyes full of welcome. Taking my hand in hers
quietly for an instant, Dulcie asked me what sort of journey I had had,
and presently led me across the hall to the drawing-room.

"You will like to see father," she said. "He and Aunt Hannah are in the
drawing-room; they've looked forward so much to your coming."

With a heart beating faster than usual I followed Dulcie. Her father I
was always glad to see, and we were exceedingly good friends, having
much in common. Of a good old county family, Sir Roland Challoner had
succeeded late in life to the title on the sudden death in the hunting
field of his father, Sir Nelson Challoner.

Dulcie's mother had died just after the birth of Dick, and Sir Roland
had tried to make up the loss to Dulcie by getting his only and elderly
sister Hannah--"Aunt Hannah" as she was inevitably called by all who
stayed at Holt Manor, and in fact by everybody who had seen her more
than twice--to come and live with him. And there at Holt she had, in her
eccentric way, ever since superintended domestic arrangements and
mothered his beautiful little girl and her only brother, by this time an
obstreperous boy of fourteen, at Eton and on his way to Oxford.

Aunt Hannah was, as Dulcie expressed it, "rather a dear, quaint thing."
But she was more than that, I thought. She had such a pungent wit, her
sayings were at times so downright--not to say acrid--that many stood in
terror of her and positively dreaded her quick tongue. I rather liked
Aunt Hannah myself, perhaps because, by the greatest of good luck, I
happened not to have done anything so far to incur her displeasure,
which she was never backward in expressing forcibly, or, as Dick the
schoolboy brother put it, "in no measured terms." Still, as it is the
unexpected that always happens, I knew there might yet come a day when I
should be called upon to break a lance with Aunt Hannah, and I must say
I devoutly hoped that in the event of so deplorable an occurrence,
heaven would vouchsafe me the victory. Steeped in intrigue up to her old
ears, Aunt Hannah had, I believed, several times laid deep plans
touching her niece's future--plans mysterious to the last degree, which
seemed to afford her the liveliest satisfaction. None of these schemes,
however, had succeeded up to the present, for Dulcie seemed with
delightful inconsistence consistently to "turn down" the admirable
suitors whom Aunt Hannah metaphorically dangled before her eyes. Yet so
cleverly did she do this that, in some wondrous way known only to
herself, she continued to retain them all in the capacity of firm
friends, and apparently no hearts were ever permanently bruised.

As I say, I quite liked Aunt Hannah, and she had afforded me a good deal
of innocent amusement during my not infrequent visits at Holt Manor.
Certainly on these occasions I had managed to adopt, if not actually a
brotherly, at any rate an almost brotherly demeanour towards Dulcie
whenever the sharp-eyed old lady chanced to be in the vicinity. As a
result, after much careful chaperonage, and even astute watching, of my
manner towards her niece, Aunt Hannah had "slacked off" delightfully,
evidently regarding me as one of those stolid and casual nonentities
who, from lack of much interest in anything can safely be trusted
anywhere and under the most trying circumstances.

"Here is a telegram for you, Mike," Dulcie said to me one morning, when
I had been several days at Holt and the slow routine of life was
beginning to reassert itself in the sleepy village after the excitement
created by Christmas. The sight of the envelope she handed to me sent my
thoughts back to London, the very existence of which I seemed to have
entirely forgotten during the past delightful days in this happy,
peaceful spot. My gaze was riveted upon Dulcie, standing there before
me, straight and slim in her dark violet breakfast gown, with its
ruffles of old lace at neck and wrists, the warm light from the fire
turning her fluffy brown hair to gold, as I mechanically tore open the
envelope, then pulled the telegram out.

"You don't seem in a hurry to read it," she exclaimed lightly, as I sat
there looking at her still, the telegram open in my hands.

I glanced down. It was from Osborne, and ran:

"Read report to-day's papers about Maresfield Gardens fire. Write me
what you think about it.

"JACK OSBORNE."

I read it through again, then looked up at Dulcie, who still stood there
before me.

"Have the papers come?" I asked.

She glanced up at the clock.

"They won't be here just yet," she answered. "We don't get them before
midday, you know, and during these days they haven't arrived until lunch
time, owing to Christmas."

"You can read it if you like," I said, handing her the telegram, for I
had seen her glance at it inquisitively. "It will interest you
enormously."

She made a little grimace when she had read it.

"'Interest me enormously,'" she said contemptuously, crumpling up the
paper and tossing it into the grate. For some moments she did not speak.

"What fire was there at Maresfield Gardens?" she inquired suddenly, "and
why does he ask you what you think about it?"

"Ah, so it does interest you a little," I exclaimed, taking hold of her
hand and drawing her towards me, for as she stood there looking down at
me she seemed somehow to magnetize me. "Sit by me, here, and I'll
tell you."

I told her of the conversation at the club, of Lord Easterton's dinner,
of Osborne's queer suggestion, of our visit to the house at Maresfield
Gardens in the middle of the night, of our being admitted by the strange
woman, including, of course, the incident of the serpent.

When I had finished, she looked at me seriously for some moments without
speaking.

"I don't think I like that adventure," she said at last.

For a moment she paused.

"Don't go to that house again, Mike," she suddenly exclaimed. "Promise
me you won't."

I was deliberating what reply I should make to this request, though I
did not think it likely I should want to go to the house again, when our
attention was distracted by the footman entering with the morning
papers--we were sitting in the big hall, before the fire of
blazing logs.

Dulcie sprang up and snatched the papers from the man, and Dick,
bouncing in at that instant, exclaimed with mock solemnity:

"Oh fie! 'Thou shalt not snatch,' Dulcie, you are 'no lady.'"

"Thank heaven for that," she retorted quickly, then began to tantalize
me by holding the papers just beyond my reach.

At last she gave me two, and Dick one, opened one herself, and sat upon
the rest. They made quite a pile, for Sir Roland was one of those
broad-minded men who like to read both sides on questions of any
importance.

I soon found the report I sought. It occupied a prominent position, and
was headed:

HAMPSTEAD FIRE MYSTERY
BODY FOUND STABBED
POLICE PUZZLED

The disastrous fire at Number 340 Maresfield Gardens, on Christmas Eve,
has given rise to an interesting sequel.

I had not been aware that a fire had occurred there, and I read on:

It was confidently hoped that no lives had been lost, but about midday
yesterday the charred body of a woman was discovered among the _debris_.

Upon careful examination it was ascertained beyond doubt that the body
had been several times stabbed, apparently with some sharp weapon or
instrument. All the wounds were in the breast, and it is stated that any
one of them might have caused death.

The police are instituting searching inquiries, and a sensational
announcement will most likely be made shortly. The origin of the
conflagration remains a mystery. Apparently nobody occupied the house
when the fire broke out, the sub-tenants, whose identity is veiled in
obscurity, having left some days previously.

"Have you read the account in your paper?" I asked, turning to Dulcie as
I put mine down.

"Yes," she answered, "I have just finished it. Isn't it terrible?"

"I have a theory," a boy's voice exclaimed suddenly. Dick, seated on the
floor, tossed aside the newspaper I had thrown to him.

"That woman whose body has been found may have been stabbed, but I
believe that big cobra had something to do with her death. I don't know
why I think that, but I do. It's instinct, I suppose. Michael, I believe
you were spoofed by that man Gastrell, whoever he is--absolutely spoofed."

"Good heavens, Dick!" I exclaimed in dismay, "how do you come to know
what I have just told to Dulcie in confidence?"

"Oh, ask me another, old sport!" he cried out, and burst into laughter.
"If you will 'exchange confidences'--isn't that the phrase?--with
Dulcie, and be so engrossed that you don't notice me in the room--well,
what can you expect?"




CHAPTER IV


IN FULL CRY

Riding to hounds is one of the few forms of sport which appeal to me,
and I should like it better still if no fox or other creature
were tortured.

On that point Dulcie and I had long been agreed; it was one of many
questions upon which we saw eye to eye, for on some subjects our
views differed.

"It seems to me grotesque," I remember her saying to me once, "that we
English should hold up our hands in horror at the thought of
bull-fights, while so many of us take pleasure in the hateful business
of the kill in fox-hunting."

In reply I had explained to her that the art of diplomacy lies in seeing
the beam in the other man's eye and drawing attention to it, while
blinding oneself to the mote in one's own, and if possible convincing
the other man that the mote does not exist. Dulcie, however, had her
full share of intelligence, with the result that, in modern slang, she
"wasn't taking any."

"In that case," she had retorted, "you should feel thankful that you are
not a diplomat, Mike. You have your points, but tact and logic are not
among them, you know!"

Sir Roland always mounted me when I stayed at Holt Manor in the hunting
season, and already I had enjoyed two capital days' sport. Pressed to
do so--and it had not needed great persuasion--instead of returning to
town on the second Saturday after Christmas, I had stayed over the
Sunday, for on the Monday hounds were to meet at the Manor House. All
the other guests, with the exception of two cousins of Sir Roland's, had
left on the Saturday, so that we were a family party to all intents; in
secret I was determined that before the dawn of spring I should be a
member of the family in reality.

Mounted on a well-shaped chestnut three parts thoroughbred, Dulcie had
never, I thought, looked so wholly captivating as she did on that Monday
morning; I overtook her, I remember, while the chattering cavalcade
trotted from the meet at Holt Manor to the first cover to be drawn.

The first cover proved to be tenantless. So did a small, thickly
underwooded copse. So did a stretch of bracken. So did a large pine wood
some miles from Holt Manor, which was usually a sure find.

"You may say what you like," Dulcie exclaimed as the notes of the
huntsman's horn warned us that the pack was once more being blown out of
cover, "I maintain still that a drag hunt has advantages over a fox
hunt--your red herring or your sack of aniseed rags never disappoint
you, and you are bound to get a run."

As we turned out of the lane into a broad meadow, then broke into a hand
canter across the soft, springy turf, to take up our position at a point
where we could easily slip forward if hounds should find, I told Dulcie
jokingly that if her father preserved foxes as carefully as he always
said he did, these covers on his estate would not have been drawn blank.

She turned her head sharply.

"Father always says," she exclaimed, "that--"

But what he always said I never heard, for at that instant a piercing
"Tally-ho!" rent the air, and, looking up, we saw a long, yellow,
lean-bodied fox which apparently had jumped up within a hundred yards of
the pack, lolloping unconcernedly towards a hedge near by. He reached
the fence, paused, cast a single glance behind him at the fifteen or so
couple of relentless four-footed pursuers, then popped calmly through a
gap in the fence, and disappeared.

A few moments later hounds had settled to the line, and were streaming
out across the broad, undulating pasture which spread away before us in
the distance, cut here and there by thorn fences, a winding stream
marked by pollards, and several post-and-rails. From all directions came
the field, galloping at top speed for the only gate in the thick hedge,
fifty yards ahead of us, crowding and jostling one another in their
anxiety to get through. Six or eight horsemen had cleared the fence at
the few places where it was jumpable. Others were preparing to follow
them. The music of the flying pack grew less distinct.

"Come along, Mike!" Dulcie called to me, turning her horse abruptly in
the direction of the hedge, "we shall get left if we hang about here."

She was thirty yards from the hedge now--twenty--ten. Timing his stroke
to a nicety her horse rose. An instant later he had cleared the fence,
with a foot or more to spare. I followed, and almost as my mare landed I
saw Dulcie lower her head and cast a backward glance.

Now we were sailing side by side over the broad, undulating pastures
which form a feature of that part of Berkshire. A hundred yards ahead of
us the pack tore ever onward, their sterns and noses mostly to the
ground, their music rising at intervals--a confused medley of sound in
various cadences, above which a single, deep, bell-like note seemed ever
prominent, insistent.

"That's Merry Boy," Dulcie exclaimed as she began to steady her mount--a
stiff post-and-rails was fifty yards in front of us. "I know his voice
well. Dan always declares that Merry Boy couldn't blunder if he
tried"--I knew Dan to be the huntsman.

On and on the pack swept, now heading apparently for a cover of dark
pines visible upon a hill to the left of us, away against the skyline.
In front of us and to right and left horses were clearing fences, which
here were very numerous, some jumping well and freely, some blundering,
some pecking on landing, a few falling. Yet, considering the size of the
field, there was very little grief.

"Who is the girl in the brown habit?" I asked Dulcie, soon after we had
negotiated a rather high-banked brook. I had noticed this girl in the
brown habit almost from the beginning of the run--tall, graceful, a
finished horsewoman, mounted on a black thoroughbred, and apparently
unaccompanied, even by a groom.

"That?" Dulcie exclaimed, bringing her horse a little nearer, so that
she need not speak too loud. "Oh, she is something of a mystery. She is
a widow, though she can't be more than twenty-four or five. She lives at
the Rook Hotel, in Newbury, and has three horses stabled there. She must
have been there a couple of months, now. A few people have called upon
her, including my father and Aunt Hannah, but nobody seems to know
anything about her, who she is or was, or where she comes from. Doesn't
she ride well? I like her, though as yet I hardly know her. She's so
pretty, too, and has such a nice voice. I'll introduce you, if you like,
if I get a chance later."

I remembered that this widow in the brown habit had been one of the
first to arrive at the meet, but she had not dismounted. Dulcie also
told me that she had dined at Holt once, and evinced great interest in
the house. She had brought with her an old volume containing pictures of
the place as it was in some early century, a book Sir Roland had never
seen before, and that he had read with avidity, for everything to do
with the past history of his house appealed to him. Mrs. Stapleton had
ended by making him a present of the book, and before she had left, that
night Sir Roland had shown her over the whole house, pointing out the
priests' hiding-hole--a curious chamber which fifty years before had
come to light while repairs were being made in the great hall
chimney--also a secret door which led apparently nowhere.

"I think my father was greatly attracted by her," Dulcie said, "and I am
not surprised. I think she is quite lovely, though in such a curious,
irregular way; but besides that there is something awfully 'taking'
about her. She doesn't, however, seem to 'go down' very well with the
people about here; but then you know what county society is. She seems
to have hardly any friends, and to live an almost solitary life."

Though I had spared her as much as I could, and though I ride barely ten
stone seven, my mare was beginning to sob. Unbuttoning my coat and
pulling out my watch as we still galloped along, I found that hounds had
been running close on forty minutes without a moment's check.

"Dulcie," I said, coming up alongside her again, "my mare is nearly
beat. Have you a second horse out?"

She told me she had not--that my mount would have been her second horse
had she been out alone.

"Look," she exclaimed suddenly, "they have turned sharp to the right.
Oh, I hope they won't kill! I feel miserable when they kill, especially
when the fox has shown us such good sport."

I answered something about hounds deserving blood: about the way
the farmers grumbled when foxes were not killed, and so on; but,
woman-like, she stuck to her point and would listen to no argument.

"I hope they'll lose him in that cover just ahead," she exclaimed.
"Hounds may deserve blood, but such a good fox as this deserves to get
away, while as for the farmers--well, let them grumble!"

Half a minute later the pack disappeared into the dense pine wood. Then
suddenly there was silence, all but the sound of horses galloping still;
of horses blowing, panting, sobbing. From all directions they seemed
to come.

"Whoo-whoop!"

The scream, issuing from the depths of the wood, rent the air. An
instant later it came again:

"Whoo-whoo-_whoop_!"

There was a sound of cracking twigs, of a heavy body forcing its way
through undergrowth, and the first whip crashed out of the cover, his
horse stumbling as he landed, but recovering himself cleverly.

"Have they killed?" several voices called.

"No, worse luck--gone to ground," the hunt servant answered, and Dulcie,
close beside me, exclaimed in a tone of exultation:

"Oh, good!"

I had dismounted, loosened my mare's girths, and turned her nose to the
light breeze. Sweat was pouring off her, and she was still blowing hard.

"Shall I unmount you, Dulcie?" I asked.

She nodded, and presently she stood beside me while I attended to her
horse.

"Ah, Mrs. Stapleton!" I heard her exclaim suddenly.

I had loosened the girths of Dulcie's horse, and now I looked up.

Seated upon a black thoroughbred, an exceedingly beautiful young woman
gazed down with flushed face and shining eyes.

It was a rather strange face, all things considered. The features were
irregular, yet small and refined. The eyes were bright and brown--at
least not exactly brown; rather they were the colour of a brilliant
red-brown wallflower, and large and full of expression. Her skin, though
extremely clear, was slightly freckled.

Dulcie had exchanged a few remarks with her. Now she turned to me.

"Mike," she said, "I want to introduce you to Mrs. Stapleton. Mrs.
Stapleton, do you know Mr. Berrington?"

The beautiful young widow, gazing down at me as I looked up at her and
raised my hat, presently made some complimentary remark about my mount
and the way she jumped, then added:

"I noticed her all through the run--she's just the stamp of animal I
have been looking for. Is she for sale, by any chance, Mr. Berrington?"

I replied that the mare was not mine, that she must ask Miss Challoner
or Sir Roland. For the instant it struck me as odd that, hunting
regularly with this pack, she should not have recognized the animal,
for I knew that Dulcie rode it frequently. Then I remembered that some
people can no more recognize horses than they can recognize their casual
friends when they meet them in the street, and the thought faded.

There was talk of digging out the fox--an operation which Dulcie and I
equally detested--and that, added to the knowledge that we were many
miles from Holt, also that our horses had had enough, made us decide to
set out for home.

Looking back, for some reason, as we walked our horses away from the
cover-side towards the nearest lane, I noticed the young widow seated
erect upon her black horse, staring after us. I turned to shut the gate,
after we had passed into the lane; she was still sitting there, outlined
against the wood and apparently still staring in our direction.

Why, I don't know, but as I trotted quietly along the lane, to overtake
Dulcie, whose horse was an exceptionally fast walker, I felt uneasy.

Presently my thoughts drifted into quite a different channel. All
recollection of the day's sport, of the pretty widow I had just talked
to, and of the impression she had left upon my mind, faded completely. I
was thinking of someone else, someone close beside me, almost touching
me, and yet--

Neither of us spoke. It was nearly four o'clock. The afternoon was
quickly closing in. Away beyond the woods which sloped upward in the
western distance until they touched the sky, the sun's blood-red beam
pierced the slowly-rising mist rolling down into the valley where the
pollards marked the winding course of the narrow, sluggish stream. Over
brown woods and furrowed fields it cast a curious glow.

Now the light of the winter's sun, sinking still, fell full on my
companion's face, I caught the outline of her profile, and my pulses
seemed to quicken. Her hair was burnished gold. Her eyes shone
strangely. Her expression, to my eyes, seemed to be entirely
transformed. How young she looked at that instant, how absolutely, how
indescribably attractive! Would she, I wondered, ever come to understand
how deeply she had stolen into my heart? Until this instant I myself
seemed not fully to have realized it.

Presently she turned her head. Her gaze rested on mine. Gravely,
steadily, her wonderful brown eyes read--I firmly believe--what was in
my soul: how madly I had come to love her. Without meaning to, I
started. A sensation of thrilling expectancy took possession of me. I
was approaching, I felt, the crisis of my life, the outcome of which
must mean everything to both of us.

"You are very silent, Mike," she said in a low, and, as I thought,
rather strained voice. "Is anything the matter?"

I swallowed before answering.

"Yes--something is the matter," I said limply.

"What?"

I caught my breath. How could she look into my eyes like that, ask that
question--such a foolish question it seemed--as though I were naught to
her but a stranger, or, at most, some merely casual acquaintance? Was it
possible she realized nothing, suspected nothing, had no faint idea of
the feeling I entertained for her?

"What is the matter?" she asked again, as I had not answered.

"Oh, it's something--well, something I can't well explain to you under
the circumstances," I replied awkwardly, an anxious, hot feeling
coming over me.

"Under what circumstances?"

"What circumstances!"

"Yes."

"This is our gap," I exclaimed hurriedly, as we came to a broken bank by
the lane-side--I was glad of the excuse for not answering. I turned my
mare's nose towards the bank, touched her with the spur, and at once she
scrambled over.

Dulcie followed.

Around us a forest of pines, dark, motionless, forbidding, towered into
the sky. To right and left moss-grown rides wound their way into the
undulating cover, becoming tunnels in the distance as they vanished into
blackness, for the day was almost spent.

Slowly we turned into the broader of the two rides. We still rode side
by side. Still neither of us spoke. Now the moss beneath our horses'
hoofs grew so thick and soft that their very footfalls became muffled.

Ten minutes must have passed. In the heart of the dense wood all was
still as death, save for a pheasant's evening crow, and the sudden rush
of a rabbit signalling danger to its companions.

"What circumstances, Mike?" Dulcie repeated. She spoke in a strange
tone. Her voice was very low, as though she feared to break the silence
which surrounded us.

Taken aback, I hesitated. We were very close together now--my leg
touched her horse. Already, overhead in a moonless sky, the stars shone
brightly. In the growing gloom her face was visible, though
partly blurred.

"Why not stop here a moment?" I said, hardly knowing that I spoke, or
why I spoke. My mouth had grown suddenly dry. The _timbre_ of my voice
somehow founded different. Without answering she shortened her reins,
and her horse was still.

Why had we stopped? Why had I suggested our stopping? I saw her, in the
darkness, turn her face to mine, but she said nothing.

"Dulcie!" I exclaimed suddenly, no longer able to control myself.
Without knowing it I leant forward in my saddle. I could see her eyes,
now. Her gaze was set on mine. Her lips were slightly parted. Her breast
rose and fell.

Some strange, irresistible force seemed all at once to master me,
deadening my will, my brain, my power of self-restraint. My arm was
about her; I was drawing her towards me. I felt surprise that she should
offer no resistance. My lips were pressed on hers....

       *       *       *       *       *

She was kissing me feverishly, passionately. Her whole soul seemed to
have become suddenly transformed. Her arms were about my neck--I could
not draw away.

"Oh, Mike! Mike!" she gasped, "tell me you really mean it--that you are
not just playing with me--flirting with me--tell me you ... oh, I love
you so, dearest. Ah, yes. I love you so, I love you so!"

It was very dark by the time we had made our way through the extensive
wood--a short cut to Holt Manor--and were once more in the lanes, I
felt strangely happy, and yet a curious feeling which I could neither
explain nor account for obsessed me.

Our joy was so great--would it last? That was the purport of my
sensation, if I may express it so. I longed at that moment to be able to
look into the future. What had the Fates in store for me--for us both?

Perhaps it was as well I didn't know.

We had entered the park gates, and were half-way up the long avenue of
tall elms and stately oaks, when I saw a light approaching through the
darkness. It came nearer, and we guessed it must be a man on foot,
carrying a lantern.

Now he was quite close.

"Is that Miss Dulcie? a voice inquired out of the blackness, as the
light became stationary.

"Yes. That you, Churchill?" Dulcie called back.

Churchill was the head gardener. Born and bred on the estate, there were
few things he loved better than to recall to mind, and relate to anybody
sufficiently patient to listen to him, stories and anecdotes of the
family. Of "Miss Dulcie" he would talk for an hour if you let him,
telling you how he remembered her when she was "not so high," and of the
things she had done and said as a child.

"What do you want, Churchill?" she called to him, as he remained silent.

Still for some moments he did not speak. At last he apparently plucked
up courage.

"There's been sad doings at the house," he said, and his voice was
strained.

"Sad doings!" Dulcie exclaimed in alarm. "Why, what do you mean?"

"There's been a shocking robbery, Miss Dulcie--shocking. You'll hear
all about it when you go in. I thought it best to warn you about it. And
Master Dick--"

He stopped abruptly.

"Good heavens, Churchill!" she cried out in great alarm, "quick, tell me
what has happened, tell me everything. What about Master Dick?"

"He's been served shocking, Miss. Oh, it's a terrible affair. The whole
house looted during the hunt breakfast this, morning, and Master Dick--"

"Yes! Yes!"

"Treated something crool."

"Dick! They haven't hurt Dick. Oh, don't say they have done him some
injury!"

The tone of agony in her voice was piteous.

"He's come round now, Miss Dulcie, but he's been unconscious for hours.
They put chloroform or something on him--Sir Roland himself found him in
one of the upstairs rooms, lying on the floor just like dead."

"Oh, heavens, how awful! How is he now?"

"The two doctors are with him still, Miss, and as I come away, not ten
minutes ago, they telled me he was goin' on as well as could be
expected. It was at lunch time Sir Roland found him, and then the
robbery was discovered. Every bit of jewellery's been stolen, 'tis said,
and a whole chest-full of plate--the plate chests were open all the
morning as some of the old silver had been used at the breakfast. The
robbery must have took place during the meet, when the hall and rooms
downstairs was full of people and all the servants as busy as could be.
There was lots of cars there as you know, Miss, and the police think the
thieves must have come in a car and gone into the house as if they were
hunting-folk. But nobody don't seem to have seen any stranger going
upstairs--the police say there must have been several thieves on the
job. Master Dick may be able to tell something when he's hisself again,
pore young gentleman."

We didn't wait to hear more, but set our horses into a smart trot up the
avenue to the house.




CHAPTER V


HUGESSON GASTRELL AT HOME

A week had passed since Dulcie had promised to become my wife, and since
the amazing robbery in broad daylight at Holt Manor.

I had been five days back in town, where I had some estate business to
attend to. It was the evening of Hugesson Gastrell's house--warming
reception in his newly furnished mansion in Cumberland Place, and the
muster of well-known people was extraordinary.

Peers and peeresses, prosperous City financiers, celebrities of the
drama and of the operatic stage, luminaries of the law, diplomats, and
rich retired traders who had shed the "tradesman" and blossomed into
"gentleman," jostled one another in the rooms and on the stairs. It is
surprising how people will rush to the house of a wealthy man. At least
one Duke was present, a Cabinet Minister too, also a distinguished Judge
and two Archbishops, for I noticed them as I fought my way up into the
room where music was being performed, music the quality of which the
majority of the listeners gauged by the fees known to be paid to the
artists engaged, and by the amount of newspaper publicity those artists'
Press agents had succeeded in securing for them.

Nor were journalists lacking at this "interesting social function," as
some of them afterwards termed it in their papers. In London I move a
good deal in many kinds of society, and now I noticed, mingling in the
crowd, several men and women I was in the habit of meeting frequently,
though I did not know them to speak to--Press representatives whose
exclusive duty I knew it to be to attend social gatherings of this
description. As I edged my way through the dense throng I could hear my
favourite composition, Dvorak's "Humoresque," being played on the violin
by Beatrice Langley, who I had been told was to appear, and for a few
brief minutes the crowd was hushed. To my chagrin the music ended almost
as I succeeded in forcing my way into the room, so that I was in time
only for the applause.

Now the hall and the large rooms where the guests were, were filled with
the buzz of conversation. In two of these rooms supper was in progress,
a supper in keeping with the sumptuousness, the luxury and the general
extravagance noticeable everywhere.

For this house in Cumberland Place which he had rented from Lord
Easterton lent itself admirably to Hugesson Gastrell's distorted ideas
as to plenishing, at which some people laughed, calling them almost
Oriental in their splendour and their lavishness. Upon entering, the
idea conveyed was that here was a man who had suddenly found himself
possessed of a great deal more money than he had ever expected to come
by, and who, not being accustomed to wide means, had at once set to work
to fling his fortune broadcast, purchasing, wherever he went, everything
costly that took his fancy.

For after mounting some steps and entering under a wide portico, one
found oneself in a spacious, lofty vestibule where two flights of warmly
tinted marble steps, shallow and heavily carpeted, ran up to right and
left to a wide gallery on three sides of the hall. The marble was so
beautiful, the steps were so impressive to look upon, that one was
forcibly reminded of the staircase in the Opera House in Paris, of
course in miniature. On the lowest step on either side were carved
marble pillars supporting nude figures of great size and bearing each an
electric lamp gold-shaded to set off the yellow-tinted marble and the
Turkey carpets of gold and of richest blue. In one corner stood a
Mongolian monster, a green and gold dragon of porcelain resting on a
valuable faience pedestal--a bit of ancient Cathay set down in the heart
of London.

In their magnificence the reception rooms excelled even this hall,
boasting, as they did, a heterogeneous collection of rare antiques, of
valuable relics, and of _articles de virtu_ from practically the world
over. Everywhere they lay in strange confusion--on the mantelpieces,
tops of cupboards, on shelves, angle brackets, and on almost every
table. Here was a delicate lute of jade, used by Chinese lovers of a
thousand years ago. There stood silver lamps, carved most marvellously
and once trimmed by vestal virgins, lamps from the temples of
Herculaneum, of Rome and of Pompeii. Shadowy gods and goddesses,
dragons, fetishes of more or less hideous mien, glared everywhere at one
another in a manner most unpleasant. Porcelains; wonderful
blue-patterned plates from Pekin; willow-patterned dishes from Japan;
ancient hammered beer tankards from Bavaria and the Rhine; long-stemmed
Venetian glasses of iridescent hues, were scattered everywhere in
bewildering profusion. In an ante-room was a priceless crucifix in three
different woods, from Ober-Ammergau; on the mantelpieces of three of the
reception rooms were old French gilt clocks--the kind found nowadays
only in secluded and old inns of the Bohemian Quartier Latin, inns
which the tourist never sees, and where "collectors" are to all intents
unknown. Set upon this landing of polished oak upon the first floor was
a very ancient sundial, taken from some French chateau, a truly
beautiful _objet d'art_ in azure and faded gold, with foliated crest
above, borne long ago, no doubt, by some highly pompous dignitary. Here
and there, too, were suits of armour of beaten steel--glittering
figures, rigid and erect and marvellously inlaid with several different
metals. Two rooms of the building, I was told by a guest with whom I had
entered into conversation, were set aside entirely as an armoury.

Hardly had I finished observing all this, and a great deal more besides,
when a voice at my elbow exclaimed:

"Good evening, Mr. Berrington. I wonder, now, if you'll remember
me--eh?"

As I turned, I instantly recognized the speaker.

"Of course I recollect you--Mrs. Stapleton," I exclaimed, looking into
her eyes with, I am afraid, rather unconcealed admiration, for I don't
pretend that I am not of a very susceptible nature. "I have met many
people I know, this evening," I continued, "but this is an unlooked-for
pleasure. I was told in Berkshire that you never came to town."

"Were you really?" she exclaimed with a ripple of merry laughter. "They
seem, down there, to know more about one's movements than one
knows oneself."

For an instant she paused.

"And how is your lovely and delightful friend--Dulcie Challoner?" she
inquired presently. "Is she here to-night?"

"No," I said, wondering for the moment if she knew or suspected my
secret, for our engagement had not yet been announced. "The Challoners
don't know our host, though, judging by the people here to-night, he
seems to know nearly everybody."

"Do you know him well? Have you known him long?" she inquired
carelessly, letting her gaze rest on mine.

I told her that our acquaintanceship was very slight, that I had made
his acquaintance in Geneva, and met him once afterwards in London.

"I don't know him well, either," she observed, then added with some
emphasis, "He strikes me as being a most charming young man."

Naturally I agreed with her, though I had been unable to make up my mind
whether, upon the whole, I liked him or not. I thought that upon the
whole I didn't, seeing what strange things had happened.

"By the by," I said suddenly, "have you had supper?"

She answered that she had not, and added that she was "starving."
Several people were emerging from one of the supper rooms, and thus it
came that I presently found myself seated _tete-a-tete_ with the
beautiful widow, and at last beginning to enjoy an evening which until
now I had found rather dull.

It was natural that we should presently speak of Berkshire and of Holt
Manor, and soon we were discussing at length the subject of the robbery.

"And have the police as yet no clues?" Mrs. Stapleton suddenly asked.

"None, apparently. I suppose you have heard all about what happened, and
the statements made by Sir Roland's little son, Dick Challoner."

"I know nothing beyond what I read in the newspapers," she replied. "The
papers mentioned that Sir Roland's boy had been chloroformed by the
thief or thieves--that was all so far as I remember."

"Yes," I answered, "he was chloroformed, but he need not have been
according to his own account--and as he is extremely truthful and never
boasts, I think we may believe his story. He had his head and shoulders
in a big oak chest in his father's bedroom, where his father had sent
him to find a hunting apron to lend to somebody, and when he stood
upright again he heard two men talking, upon the opposite side of the
screen which hid the oak chest.

"The voices were those of strangers, and the boy naturally supposed that
the speakers were some friends of Sir Roland's. He was about to show
himself, when he heard one of the men say:

"'She says this drawer has money in it: give me your key.'

"He heard a key being pushed into a drawer lock, the drawer pulled out,
the chink of coin and the crackle of bank-notes. Then he heard the other
man suddenly say:

"'Hurry up. They'll have got the plate by this time and be waiting for
us.'

"The boy was awfully frightened, of course, but he didn't lose his head.
Knowing that his presence must be discovered in a moment, he sprang out
from behind the screen, intending to dash past the men and downstairs
and give the alarm. Unfortunately he rushed right up against one of
them, who instantly gripped him and clapped his hand over his mouth
while the other man pressed his hand over his eyes--presumably to
prevent Dick's being afterwards able to identify them. Dick says that
one of the men twisted his arm until he couldn't stir without extreme
pain, then told him that he must show them where the key of Sir
Roland's safe was--a little safe in the wall in his bedroom. Dick knew
where the key was--Sir Roland keeps it, it seems, in a drawer of his
dressing-table--but he refused to tell, though the man screwed his arm
until he nearly broke it--he strained it badly, and the poor little chap
has it still in a sling. Then, finding that they could do nothing with
him, and that nothing would make him 'peach,' as he says--though he says
they threatened to hit him on the head--one of them pressed something
over his mouth and nose, which seemed to suffocate him. What happened
after that he doesn't know, as he lost consciousness."

"What a brave little boy," my beautiful companion exclaimed in a tone of
admiration. "Did he say at all what the men were like?"

"He didn't catch even a glimpse of their faces, they pounced on him so
quickly. But he says that both wore hunting kit, and he thinks both were
tall. One wore pink."

"It was a carefully planned affair, anyway," Mrs. Stapleton said
thoughtfully, as I refilled her glass with Pol Roger. "What was the
actual value of the things stolen?"

"Sir Roland puts it at twelve or fourteen thousand pounds, roughly. You
see, he had a lot of jewellery that had belonged to Lady Challoner and
that would have been Miss Challoner's; most of that was stolen. It
should have been in the safe, of course, but Sir Roland had taken it out
the week before, intending to send it all to London to be thoroughly
overhauled and cleaned--he was going to give it to Dulcie--to Miss
Challoner on her twenty-first birthday; she comes of age next month, you
know. It was in one of the drawers that the thieves unlocked, and they
took most of it. They would have taken the lot, only some of it was in
a back partition of the drawer, and they apparently overlooked it."

"But how did they manage to steal the plate? I read in some paper that a
lot of plate was stolen."

"Heaven knows--but they got it somehow. The police think that other men,
disguised probably as gentlemen's servants, must have made their way
into the pantry during the hunt breakfast, while Sir Roland's servants
were up to their eyes in work, attending to everybody, and have slipped
it into bags and taken it out to a waiting motor. Strangers could easily
have gone into the back premises like that, unnoticed, in the middle of
the bustle and confusion. If Dick had told the men who bullied him what
they wanted to know, Sir Roland's safe would have been ransacked too,
and several thousands of pounds more worth of stuff stolen, most likely.
He is a little brick, that boy."

"He is, indeed. How long did he remain unconscious?"

"Until Sir Roland himself found him, just before lunch. The ruffians had
pushed him under the bed, and if Sir Roland had not happened to catch
sight of his foot, which protruded a little, the boy might have been
left there until night, or even until next day, and the whole household
have been hunting for him."

Mrs. Stapleton sipped some champagne, then asked:

"Is anybody suspected?"

"That's difficult to say," I answered. "Naturally the police think that
one or other of the servants at Holt must know something of the affair,
even have been an actual accomplice--but which? None of the servants has
been there less than four years, it seems, and several have been in Sir
Roland's service ten and fifteen years--the old butler was born on the
estate. Sir Roland scouts the idea that any of his servants had a hand
in the affair, and he told the police so at once. Even the fact that one
of the thieves had, according to Dick, referred to some woman--he had
said, '_She_ says this drawer has money in it'--wouldn't make Sir Roland
suspect any of the maids.

"The police then asked him in a roundabout way if he thought any of his
guests could have had anything to say to it. Phew! How furious Sir
Roland became with them! You should have seen him--I was with him at the
time. Then suddenly he grew quite calm, realizing that they were, after
all, only trying to do their duty and to help him to trace the thieves.

"'Up to the present I have not, so far as I am aware,' he said in that
cold, dignified way of his, 'entertained criminals at Holt Manor or
elsewhere. No, my man,' he ended, turning to the sergeant, or the
inspector, or whatever he was, 'the men who have stolen my property were
not any of my guests. You may set your minds at rest on that point.'"

Conversation drifted to other topics. Several times during supper I
endeavoured to lead my beautiful companion on to talk about herself, but
on each occasion she cleverly diverted conversation to some other
subject. I confess that when she casually questioned me concerning my
own affairs I was less successful in evading her inquiries; or it may
have been that I, in common with most of my sex, like to talk freely
about "self" and "self's" affairs, especially when the listener is a
beautiful woman who appears to be sympathetic and deeply interested in
all one has to say about oneself.

During that brief half-hour our intimacy grew apace. There are people
with whom one seems to have been on terms of friendship, almost as
though one had known them for years, within ten minutes after being
introduced to them; others who, when one has known them quite a long
time, seem still to remain comparatively strangers. Mrs. Stapleton
belonged to the first group, although she spoke so little about herself.
Yet I was not in the least attracted by her in the way Dulcie Challoner
attracted me. I found her capital company; I could imagine our becoming
great friends; I could think of her in the light of a _bonne camarade_.
But that was all. As for feeling tempted to fall in love with her--but
the bare thought was grotesque.

"What a charming, delightful girl that is--I mean Miss Challoner," Mrs.
Stapleton exclaimed suddenly, when, after talking a great deal, we had
been silent for a few moments. "And how exquisitely pretty," she added
after an instant's pause.

I hardly knew what to say. I know enough of women to be aware that no
woman is particularly anxious, save in exceptional cases, to listen to a
panegyric on the charms and the physical attractions of some other
woman. Therefore, after a moment's reflection, I answered with affected
indifference:

"I think I agree with you. I have known her a number of years. Her
father was a great friend of my father's."

"Indeed?" she replied, raising her eyebrows a little, then letting her
gaze rest full on mine. "That is interesting. I am a believer in
platonic friendships. I wonder if you are."

"Oh, of course," I said quickly. "It is ridiculous to suppose that a man
and woman can't be friends without--without--"

"Yes?" she said encouragingly.

"Oh, well--I suppose I mean without falling in love with each other."

She smiled in a way that puzzled me a little, but said nothing.

"Do you mean in all cases?" she suddenly inquired.

"In most cases, anyway."

"And when would you make an exception?"

This was a problem I felt I could not solve. However, I made a dash at
it.

"In the case of people of abnormally susceptible temperament," I said,
"I suppose such people couldn't be friends without soon
becoming--well, lovers."

"Ah, I see," she observed thoughtfully.

She was toying with a strawberry ice, and her lowered eyelids displayed
the extraordinary length of their lashes. Certainly I was talking to an
interesting and very lovely woman--though again here, as before in the
hunting field in Berkshire, I found myself wondering in what her beauty
consisted. Not a feature was regular; the freckles on nose and forehead
seemed to show more plainly under the glare of the electric lights; the
eyes were red-brown. But how large they were, and how they seemed to
sparkle with intelligence!

She looked up suddenly. Her expression was serious now. Up to the
present her eyes, while she talked, had been singularly animated, often
full of laughter.

"Mr. Berrington, have you ever been in love?"

I was so surprised at this question, from a woman to whom I was
practically a stranger, that I thought it best to treat it as a jest.

"Yes, a dozen times," I answered. "I am in love at this moment," I added
lightly, as if joking.

"You need not have told me that," she said, serious still. "I knew it
the moment I saw you both together. I asked--but only to hear what you
would say."

"But--but--" I stammered, "I--you--that is I don't quite catch your
meaning. When did you see 'us' both together--and who is the other
person you are thinking of?"

She had finished her ice.

"Please give me some more champagne," she said.

I picked up the half-empty bottle, refilled her glass, then my own. She
held out her glass until it clinked against mine.

"Here is health and long life to your friend on the chestnut," she
exclaimed, smiling again, "and to you too. I only hope that your married
life will be happier than--"

She checked herself. Her tongue had run away with her, and, as our lips
touched our glasses, I mentally finished her sentence.

But who, I wondered, had her husband been?

People were still flocking into the room. Others were moving out. From a
distance there came to us above the noise and the buzz of conversation
the words of a song I love:

     "Mon coeur s'ouvre a ta voix
     Comme s'ouvre les fleurs
     Aux baisers de l'aurore,
     Mais O! Mon bien aime
     Pour mieux secher mes pleurs
     Que ta voix parle encore,
     Dis moi qu'a Dalila
     Tu reviens pour jamais.
     Redis a ma tendresse
     Les serments d'autrefois
     Les serments que j'aimais.
     Ah, reponds a ma tendresse,
     Ah, verse-moi l'ivresse!"

"How gorgeous!" I exclaimed, straining my ears in a vain attempt to hear
better. "Who is it?"

"Kirkby-Lunn," my companion answered quickly. "Are you fond--"

She stopped. Her face was partly turned. I saw a glance of recognition
flash into her eyes and vanish instantly. Following the direction of her
glance, my gaze rested upon the strange, striking woman I had seen but
once but could not possibly forget. Mrs. Gastrell had just entered, and
with her, to my astonishment, Jack Osborne. It was Jasmine Gastrell with
whom my companion had exchanged that momentary glance of recognition.

"Are you fond of music?" Mrs. Stapleton asked, looking at me again.

"Very," I answered absently, "of music that is music."

For my attention had become suddenly distracted. How came this woman to
be here, this woman who called herself Gastrell's wife? Lord Easterton
was somewhere about, for I had seen him in the crowd. Such a striking
woman would be sure to attract his attention, he would inquire who she
was, he might even ask Gastrell, and then what would happen? What would
Gastrell say? Was the woman actually his wife, or was she--

Mechanically I conversed with my companion for a minute or two longer,
then suddenly she suggested that we should go.

"And let some of these starving people take our table," she added, as
she prepared to rise.

Osborne and his singularly lovely companion were now seated at a table
only a few yards off. His back was turned to us, and I had not caught
Mrs. Gastrell's glance.

"D'you know who that is, that woman who has just come in?" I inquired
carelessly, indicating her as I rose.

"That?" Mrs. Stapleton answered, looking full at her, and this time
their eyes met in a cold stare. "No, I have no idea."

I confess that this flat untruth, spoken with such absolute
_sang-froid,_ somewhat disconcerted me. For I could not be in the least
doubt that I had distinctly seen the two women greet each other with
that brief glance of mutual recognition.




CHAPTER VI


THE HOUSE IN GRAFTON STREET

One afternoon, some days later, I was sitting in my flat in South Molton
Street, smoking a pipe and carelessly skimming an evening paper, when my
man brought me some letters which had just arrived.

Several I tossed aside unopened--I recognized the handwritings and was
in no haste to absorb the contents of epistles from acquaintances whose
company, at the best of times, "bored me stiff," as some Americans say.
But the letter was there that I had expected in the morning, and at once
I tore it open.

Dulcie wrote chiefly about herself--which was all I wanted to
hear--about her father and "Aunt Hannah," while two pages she devoted to
her little brother Dick, of whom she was inordinately fond.

Dick, she said, had shown the utmost pluck and endurance throughout his
painful convalescence after his rough-and-tumble with the burglars. She
told me how he had from the first sat up in bed with his "honourable
wounds" upon him, bandaged and swathed, joking and making light of the
occurrence now, as perhaps only the best breed of English schoolboy
knows how. One thing still puzzled both little Dick and herself, and for
that matter the whole family, she said--who could the woman be to whom
the thieves had alluded? No word, added Dulcie, had as yet been
forthcoming as to the whereabouts of any of the valuables stolen on that
memorable day, either family jewels or plate, and the detectives at
Scotland Yard acknowledged that so far matters were at a deadlock.

Further on in her newsy letter Dulcie made mention of the fascinating
widow staying at the Rook Hotel in Newbury, and of her wish to know her
better. She added incidentally that Mrs. Stapleton had been away since
the day after the meet at Holt Manor, and that no one knew where she was
staying. She hoped she would soon be back, she said, as she wished so
much to renew her acquaintance, and to strengthen it. Dulcie then spoke
of her Aunt Hannah, who had been particularly amusing and crochety of
late, but added that she was really such a "dear" at heart that people
all loved her when they came to know her well. "My dear," she wrote,
"Aunt Hannah has surpassed herself lately. You know what vigorous likes
and dislikes she takes, all of a sudden? Well, now Auntie has conceived
an inordinate aversion for poor Mrs. Stapleton, and seems inclined not
only to give her the cold shoulder, but to hound her down by saying the
nastiest things about her, just as the other people in the county did
when she first came to live among us. I rather believe that she had this
feeling all along, more or less, but now she seems positively to hate
her--though she confesses that she doesn't know why she does! Isn't that
like Auntie? And now she has been asking me never to notice Mrs.
Stapleton, and not to speak to her again when she returns, in fact to
drop the acquaintance entirely--and that just as we have called, and
I've tried to be nice to her out hunting, and we've had her to dine; I
told you how taken father was with her, and how he took her all over the
house and showed her simply everything. I really don't see why I should
draw back now. Nor does father. As a matter of fact, I don't see how we
can--it has gone too far--and just to satisfy one of dear old Auntie's
whims! She has a good many, as you know, Mike. There is just this one
thing, however, that sometimes one of her unaccountable whims or
dislikes turns out to have been well grounded."

My darling then went on to speak of her father and of the happiness our
engagement afforded him, happiness tempered, as she could not help
knowing, by the sorrow her leaving him would bring to him, for the most
wonderful confidence and companionship existed between father and
daughter. This sadness, Dulcie went on, came out almost pathetically in
her father's even added tenderness to her--he whose tenderness and
affection had always been such a wonderful thing to her since her
earliest childhood. But now, she said, her father sometimes followed her
about the house and grounds when she had been absent from him for a
short time, seeking occasion for talks with her, giving her his
confidence, and consulting her wishes on matters about the gardens and
stables in a way that was quite touching. It was as though, now that the
parting was so soon to take place, he could not get enough of his only
daughter's company, as if the old man clung to her more than
ever before.

The closely-written sheets dropped from my hand on to my knee. "Ah, my
own little girl," I thought, "who wouldn't miss you--sadly, yes,
terribly? Your delightful presence, the truth and honour that seem to be
manifest in your smallest gesture, in every glance from your clear eyes;
the companionship of your fearless intellect cutting through
conventionalities like a knife, arriving at the right point with the
unerring instinct of a woman, yet with the _naivete_ of a child."

Memories crowded in upon me, memories of all my happy days with Dulcie
in the country--in the hunting field, in the gardens about her home, of
afternoons spent among the books and prints and pictures in her father's
quiet, book-lined library at Holt, of the evenings in the drawing-room
at the piano, of hours of pleasant talk in the beautiful conservatories
and on the grassy terraces, and by the lake-side below the tennis lawn.
What, I thought, would life be like when at last I had her always with
me, brightening my life, filling my own home--our home--with laughter
and with the music of her voice! Again and again she rose to my
enthralled vision, and ever she was Youth and Love, the vision crowned
with the wonder of her nebulous, brown-gold hair as she gazed at me out
of her sweet, clear eyes in which I seemed still to read unfathomable
purity and truth.

It is a terrible thing to be in love. Some savage races there are which
hold to the belief that the spirits of lovers changing places, give rise
to the feverish mental upheaval which we prosaically term "falling in
love," the spirits being restless at their enforced imprisonment and
unsatisfied until they have returned each to its appointed sphere. Now
that I have recovered from the affliction I sometimes wonder if it might
not with advantage be treated as ordinary maladies and some passions
are--with the aid of drugs. Perhaps some day it will be. Certainly it
soon will be if the eugenists get their way.

And, thinking of the letter I had just read, which now lay folded in my
pocket, my memory drifted backward. For since the day I had met Jack
Osborne at Brooks's on his return from Nigeria, many incidents had
occurred which puzzled me. Trifling incidents individually, no doubt,
yet significant when considered in the concrete. There was the incident,
for instance, of Sir Harry Dawson's declaring in a letter written to
Lord Easterton from the Riviera that he had never met Gastrell, never
heard of him even, though Lord Easterton had Gastrell's assurance that
he knew Sir Harry Dawson and had intended to call upon him on the
evening he had unwittingly entered Lord Easterton's house, which was
next door.

Then there was something not quite normal in Gastrell's posing one day
as a married man, the next as a bachelor; also in his pretending at one
moment that he had never seen Osborne and myself before, yet admitting
at the next that he had met us. True, he had advanced an apparently
sound reason for this _volte-face_ of his, but still--

The affair, too, in Maresfield Gardens. That surely was an "incident"
which bordered on a mystery. I felt I should never forget our
extraordinary reception that night--the "black out" house, as stage
managers say; our repeated ringing the door bell; the slow unlocking and
unbolting the door; the cautious inquiry; our wait in the darkness after
our admission; the discovery of that horrible serpent with its chilling
eyes; the locked door; the sudden entry of Gastrell, and his odd
conversation.

Then the conflagration which had occurred a few days later, and the
subsequent discovery among the _debris_ of a body, charred and stabbed;
the apparent ignorance of everybody as to whose body it was; the
statement made by the police that none knew the names of the sub-tenants
who had occupied that house when the fire had broken out, or what had
since become of them--the actual tenant was in America. Without a
doubt, I reflected as I knocked the ashes out of my pipe into the grate,
something "queer" was going on, and I had inadvertently got myself
mixed up in it.

The last "incident" to puzzle me had been that momentary glance of
mutual recognition exchanged between the woman I knew only as "Mrs.
Gastrell"--or "Jasmine Gastrell," as Osborne always spoke of her--and
Mrs. Stapleton, and their subsequent apparent entire lack of
recognition. That, certainly, had been most odd. What could have been
the cause of it? Why, knowing each other, did they all at once feign to
be strangers? And the extraordinarily calm way Mrs. Stapleton had,
looking me full in the eyes, assured me that she had never before even
seen the woman she had just smiled at. Lastly--though this was of less
consequence--how came Jack Osborne to be dancing attendance upon the
woman I knew as "Mrs. Gastrell," when he had assured me as we drove away
in the taxi from Maresfield Gardens that night that though he admired
her he mistrusted her?

I had filled my pipe again, and, as I puffed at it to set it going, one
more thought occurred to me. And this thought, I must say, perplexed me
as much as any.

Hugesson Gastrell was said to have spent the whole of his life, until
six months previously, in Australia and Tasmania. If that were so, then
how did he come to have so large a circle of friends, or at any rate of
acquaintances--acquaintances, too, of such distinction and high
position? Was it possible he could in a few months have come to know all
these peers and peeresses and baronets and knights, distinguished
musicians and actors and actresses, leading members of the learned
professions, and all the rest of the Society crowd who had thronged his
house that evening?

Suddenly something I had been told at the club an hour or so before
flashed back into my mind. Another club member besides Easterton had, it
seemed, become acquainted with Gastrell through Gastrell's calling at
the wrong house--by mistake.

A coincidence? Possibly. And yet--

I sucked meditatively at my pipe.

Suddenly the telephone rang. Easterton was speaking.

"What!" I exclaimed, in answer to the startling information he gave me.
"When did he disappear?"

"Where was he last seen?"

"No, he has not been here. I haven't seen him since Gastrell's
reception."

"Oh, yes, I saw you there."

"Yes, very extraordinary."

"No."

"Oh, no."

"Good. I'll come to you at once. Are you at Linden Gardens?"

"Very well, I'll come straight to the club."

Mechanically I hung up the receiver. Curious thoughts, strange
conjectures, wonderings, arguments, crowded my brain in confusion. Five
days had passed since the date of Gastrell's reception, when I had seen
Jack Osborne at supper with the woman he had said he mistrusted. Since
that evening, according to what Easterton had just told me, nobody had
seen or heard of him. He had not been to his chambers; he had not left
any message there or elsewhere; he had not written; he had neither
telegraphed nor telephoned.

Where was he? What was he doing? Could some misfortune have befallen
him? Had he--

I did not end the sentence my mind had formed. Instead I went out,
hailed a taxi, and in a few minutes was on my way to Brooks's.

Outside a house in Grafton Street a group of people stood clustered
about the door. Others, on the pavement opposite, stared up at the
windows. Two policemen upon the doorstep prevented anyone from entering.

Leaning forward as my taxi sped by, I peered in through the open door of
the house, then up at the windows, but there was nothing out of the
ordinary to be seen. Further down the street we passed three policemen
walking briskly along the pavement in the direction of the house.

"What's the commotion in Grafton Street?" I inquired of my driver as I
paid him off at Brooks's.

"I've no idea, sir," he answered. "Looks as though there was trouble of
some sort." Another fare hailed him, so our conversation ended.

I found Easterton awaiting me in a deserted card-room.

"This may be a serious affair, Berrington," he said in a tone of anxiety
as I seated myself in the opposite corner of the big, leather-covered
settee. "Here five days have gone by, and there isn't a sign of Jack
Osborne, though he had not told anybody that he intended to absent
himself, had not even hinted to anybody that he had any idea of
doing so."

"You say he has not been seen since Gastrell's reception?"

"Not since then--five days ago. The fellows here at the club are getting
quite alarmed about him--they want to advertise in the newspapers for
news of his whereabouts."

"That means publicity, a shoal of inquiries, and maybe a scandal," I
answered thoughtfully. "If Jack has intentionally disappeared for a day
or two and all at once finds himself notorious he will be furious."

"Just what I tell them," Easterton exclaimed; "I wish you would back me
up. You see, Jack hasn't any relatives to speak of, and those he has
live abroad. Consequently the fellows here consider it is what the
Americans call 'up to them' to institute inquiries, even if such
inquiries should necessitate publicity."

I pondered for a moment or two.

"You know," I said, "Jack is a curious fellow in some ways--some call
him a crank, but he isn't that. Still, he is something of a 'character,'
and absolutely unconventional. I remember his making a bet, once, that
he would punch out a boastful pugilist at the National Sporting
Club--no, it wasn't at the N.S.C., it was at a place down
East--'Wonderland,' they call it."

"And did he do it?" Easterton asked.

"Did he? By heaven, the poor chap he tackled was carried out unconscious
at the end of the second round--Jack's bet was with Teddy Forsyth, and
he pocketed a couple of ponies then and there."

"Did he really? Capital! And Teddy's such a mean chap; he didn't like
partin', did he?"

"Like it? He went about for the rest of the night with a face like a
funeral mute's."

"Capital!" Lord Easterton repeated. "But to return to the point, Jack's
eccentricities and vagaries can have nothin' to do with his
disappearance."

"Why not? How do you know?"

"Well, why should they? I only hope he hasn't gone and made a fool of
himself in any way that'll make a scandal or get him into trouble. In a
way, you know, we are connections. His mother and mine were second
cousins. That's really why I feel that I ought to do somethin' to find
out what has happened to him. Do you--do you think he can have got mixed
up with some woman?"

"I won't say that I actually think so, but I think it's more than
possible."

"No! Why? What woman?"

At that instant I remembered that the woman I had in my mind was the
woman who on board the _Masonic_ had, so Jack had told me, called
herself Hugesson Gastrell's wife, and called herself his wife again at
the house in Maresfield Gardens. But Gastrell had told Easterton, or at
any rate led him to suppose, he was unmarried. How, then, could I refer
to this woman by name without causing possible friction between
Easterton and his tenant, Gastrell?

"I am afraid I can't tell you, Easterton," I said after an instant's
hesitation. "I don't want to make mischief, and if what I think is
possible is not the case, and I tell you about it, I shall have made
mischief."

Easterton was silent. For some moments he remained seated in his corner
of the settee, looking at me rather strangely.

"I quite understand what you mean, Berrington," he said at last. "Still,
under the circumstances I should have thought--and yet no, I dare say
you are right. I may tell you candidly, though, that I can't help
thinkin' you must be mistaken in your supposition. Jack doesn't care
about women in that way. He never has cared about them. The only thing
he cares about is sport, though, of course, he admires a pretty woman,
as we all do."

To that observation I deemed it prudent to make no reply, and at that
moment a waiter entered and came across the room to us.

"Your lordship is wanted on the telephone," he said solemnly.

"Who is it?" Easterton asked, looking up.

"Scotland Yard, my lord."

"Oh, say, hold the line, and I'll come down."

"Have you informed the police, then?" I asked quickly, when the servant
had left the room.

"Yes. I went to Scotland Yard this mornin', but I told them not to let a
word about the disappearance get into the newspapers, if they could help
it, until they heard further from me, and they promised they would
respect my wish. You had better come down with me. They may have found
out something."

I waited outside the glass hutch, which effectually shut in all sound,
watching Lord Easterton's face below the electric light. His lips moved
rapidly, and by the way his expression suddenly changed I judged that he
was hearing news of importance. After talking for a minute or two he
hung up the receiver, pushed open the door and came out. His face
betrayed his emotion.

"Come over here," he said in a curious tone. "I have something to tell
you."

I followed him a little way down the passage which led to the
card-rooms. When we were out of sight and earshot of the club servants
he stopped abruptly and turned to me.

"Jack has been found," he said quickly. "He was found gagged and bound
in a house in Grafton Street half an hour ago. He is there now, and the
police are with him."

"Good God!" I exclaimed. "How did they identify him?"

"He was not unconscious. The police want me to go there at once. Come."

We walked up to Grafton Street, as it was such a little way, also
Easterton wanted to tell me more. The Inspector who had just spoken to
him had not told him what had led to the police entering the house in
Grafton Street, or if anybody else had been found upon the premises. He
had only told him that Scotland Yard had for some weeks had the house
under surveillance--they had suspected that something irregular was
going on there, but they did not know what.

"I expect they have a pretty shrewd idea," Easterton added, as we
crossed Piccadilly, "but they won't say what it is. Hello! Just look at
the crowd!"

Up at the end of Dover Street, where Grafton Street begins, the roadway
was blocked with people. When we reached the crowd we had some
difficulty in forcing our way through it. A dozen policemen were keeping
people back.

"Are you Lord Easterton?" the officer at the entrance asked, as
Easterton handed him his card. "Ah, then come this way, please, m'lord.
This gentleman a friend of yours? Follow the constable, please."

We were shown into a room on the ground floor, to the right of the hall.
It was large, high-ceilinged, with a billiard table in the middle. Half
a dozen men were standing about, two in police uniform; the remainder I
guessed to be constables in plain clothes.

Suddenly I started, and uttered an exclamation.

Seated in a big arm-chair was Dulcie Challoner, looking pale,
frightened. Beside her, with her back to me, stood Aunt Hannah!




CHAPTER VII


OSBORNE'S STORY

"Good heavens, Dulcie!" I exclaimed, hurrying across to her, "whatever
are you doing here? And you, Aunt Hannah?"

At the sound of my voice Dulcie started up in her chair, and Aunt Hannah
turned quickly. To my amazement they both looked at me without uttering.
Dulcie's eyes were troubled. She seemed inclined to speak, yet afraid
to. The expression with which Aunt Hannah peered at me chilled me.

"What is the meaning of this, Mr. Berrington?" she asked coldly, after a
brief pause. Even in that moment of tense anxiety it struck me that Aunt
Hannah looked and spoke as though reproving a naughty schoolboy.

"Meaning of what?" I said stupidly, astonishment for the moment
deadening my intelligence.

"Of your bringing us up to London to find--this."

"Bringing you up? What do you mean, Miss Challoner?" I exclaimed,
mystified.

In spite of my deep anxiety, a feeling of annoyance, of resentment, had
come over me. No man likes to be made to look ridiculous, and here was I
standing before a lot of constables, all of them staring in inquisitive
astonishment at my being thus addressed by the old lady.

"Is this Mr. Berrington, madam?" an immensely tall, bull-necked,
plain-clothes policeman, of pompous, forbidding mien, suddenly asked.

"Yes, officer, it is," she snapped. During all the time I had known her
I had never seen her quite like this.

"See here," he said, turning to me, "I want your address, and for the
present you will stay here."

I am considered good-tempered. Usually, too, I can control my feelings.
There is a limit, however, to the amount of incivility I can stand, and
this fellow was deliberately insulting me.

"How dare you speak like that to me!" I burst out. "What has this affair
to do with me? Do you know who I am?"

"Aren't you Mr. Michael Berrington?" he inquired more guardedly,
apparently taken aback at my outburst of indignation.

"I am."

"Then read that," he said, producing a telegram and holding it out
before me.

It was addressed to:

"Miss Dulcie Challoner, Holt Manor, Holt Stacey," and ran:

"The police have recovered property which they believe to have been
stolen from Holt Manor. Please come at once to 430 Grafton Street, Bond
Street, to identify it. Shall expect you by train due Paddington 12:17.
Please don't fail to come as matter very urgent.

"MICHAEL BERRINGTON."

It had been handed in at the office in Regent Street at 9:30 that
morning, and received at Holt Stacey village at 9:43.

"How absurd! How ridiculous!" I exclaimed. "My name has been forged, of
course. I never sent that telegram; this is the first I have seen or
heard of it."

"That you will have to prove," the detective answered, with official
stolidity.

"Surely, Aunt Hannah," I almost shouted--so excited did I feel--as I
again turned to her, "you can't think I sent that telegram?"

"I certainly think nothing else," she replied, and her eyes were like
shining beads. "Who would send a telegram signed with your name but you,
or someone instructed by you?"

I saw that to argue with her in the frame of mind she was then in would
be futile--my presentiment at Holt that some day I should fall foul of
her had come true! I turned to the officer.

"I must see the original of that telegram," I said quickly, "and shall
then quickly prove that it was not sent by me. How soon can I get
hold of it?"

"Oh, we can see about it at once, sir," he answered much more civilly,
for, pretending to look for something in my pocket, I had intentionally
pulled out my leather wallet, containing two hundred pounds or more in
notes, and opened it for an instant. There is nothing like the sight of
paper money to ensure civility from a policeman disposed to be
impertinent--I should like, in justice, to add that most policemen
are not.

Also Easterton had come over and spoken to me, and of course pooh-poohed
the idea of my having sent the telegram, which had just been shown to
him. Dulcie stared at me with large, pathetic eyes, and I knew that, but
for Aunt Hannah's so-to-speak mounting guard, she would have asked me
endless questions instead of sitting there mute.

"You had better come with me and hear Jack Osborne's story," Easterton
said some moments later. "The Inspector tells me he is upstairs, and
still rather weak from the effect of the treatment he has received."

I had seen a puzzled look come into Aunt Hannah's eyes while Easterton
was speaking, but she remained sour and unbending.

Osborne was sitting up in a chair, partly undressed--he still wore his
evening clothes--cotton wool bound round his ankles and one wrist. He
smiled weakly as we entered, and the policeman who sat at his bedside
immediately rose. It was easy to see that Jack had suffered a good deal;
he looked, for him, quite pale, and there were dark marks beneath his
eyes. Nor was his appearance improved by several days' growth of
beard--he was usually clean-shaven.

His story was quickly told, and points in it gave food for thought, also
for conjecture.

It seemed that, while he was at supper with the woman I knew as "Mrs.
Gastrell," at Gastrell's reception, two men, unable to find a vacant
table, had asked if they might sit at his table, where there were two
vacant seats. Both were strangers to him, and apparently to "Mrs.
Gastrell" too. They seemed, however, pleasant fellows, and presently he
had drifted into conversation with them, or they with him, and with his
fair companion--Jack, as I have said, is extremely cosmopolitan, and
picks up all sorts of acquaintances. I could well believe that at a
reception such as Gastrell's he would waive all formality of
introduction if he found himself with companionable strangers.

Supper over, the four had remained together, and later, when Jack had
seen his fair friend safely into a cab, he had rejoined the two
strangers, becoming gradually more and more friendly with them. The
reception had not ended until past one in the morning, and he and his
two acquaintances had been among the last to leave. Having all to go in
the same direction, they had shared a taxi, and on arriving at the
chambers which the strangers had told him they shared--these chambers
were in Bloomsbury, but Jack had not noticed in what street--one of the
strangers had suggested his coming in for a few minutes before returning
to the Russell Hotel, where he had his rooms, which was close by.

At first disinclined to do this, he had finally yielded to their
persuasion. He had a whiskey-and-soda with them, he said--he mentioned
that the chambers were comfortable and well furnished--and one of them
had then suggested a game of cards. They had all sat down to play, and--

Well, he remembered, he said, seeing cards being dealt--but that was all
he did remember. He supposed that after that he must have fainted, or
been made unconscious; he now suspected that the drink he had taken had
been drugged.

When he recovered consciousness he had no idea where he was, or how long
he had been insensible. The room was unfamiliar to him, and everything
about him strange. He was stretched upon a bed, in an apartment much
larger than the one he was now in, with hands and feet tightly tied. The
two windows faced a blank wall, the wall apparently of the next house;
later he came to know, by the sound of Big Ben booming in the night,
that he was still in London.

The door of the room was at the back of the bed; he could not see it
from where he lay, and, bound as he was, could not even turn, but was
forced to lie flat upon his back.

He had not long been conscious, when the light of day began to fade.
Soon the room was in pitch darkness. Then it was he became aware that
someone was in the room. He listened attentively, but could hear
nothing; nevertheless the presence of a man or woman made itself "felt"
beyond a doubt. He judged the time of day to be about six o'clock in the
evening, when suddenly somebody touched him--a hand in the darkness. He
started, and called out; but there was no answer. Some minutes later a
man spoke.

The voice was not that of either of the men he had met at Gastrell's
reception; he could swear to that, he said. Yet he seemed to recognize
the voice, indeed, to have heard it recently. He racked his brains to
remember where, but to no purpose.

The man spoke in a low tone, and its _timbre_ and inflection betrayed
what is called the voice of a gentleman, he said.

"You have been brought here," the man said, "to give certain
information, and to reveal certain secrets. If you do this, you will be
released at once--you will be taken away from here in an unconscious
state, just as you were brought here, and set down in the night not far
from your hotel. If you refuse, you will be taken out during the night,
and dropped into the Thames."

The man had then gone on to question him. The questions he had asked had
been numerous, and one and all had had to do with persons of high
station with whom Jack was on terms of intimacy--all of them rich
people. What most astonished him, he said, was that his unseen
interlocutor should know so much about him--his questions and remarks
showed how much he knew--and that he should apparently know who all his
friends were.

Jack could not remember all the questions he had been asked, but he
repeated some of them. Whereabouts did the Duchesse de Montparnasse keep
her jewels in her chateau on the Meuse? The questioner said he knew that
Osborne could tell him, because he knew that Osborne, just before going
to Nigeria, had, while staying at that chateau, been shown by the
Duchesse herself her priceless jewellery--one of the finest collections
in the world, chiefly valuable owing to its interesting historic
associations.

Then, in which apartment in Eldon Hall, in Northumberland, the seat of
the Earl of Cranmere, was the large safe that Lord Cranmere had bought
ten months before from an American firm, the name of which was given? He
said that he, Osborne, must know, because he was a guest at Lord
Cranmere's when the safe arrived--which was the truth. He also wanted to
know if there were a priests' hiding-hole in Eldon Hall, as was the case
in so many of the large country mansions built about the same period,
and, if so, its exact whereabouts in the house.

As Jack Osborne said this, my thoughts flashed away to Berkshire, to
Holt Manor, to the dark, depressing hiding-hole there that I had peered
down into more than once. Who had spoken to me of that hiding-hole only
recently? Why, Dulcie, of course. She had mentioned it whilst telling me
about Mrs. Stapleton, and about Sir Roland's showing the young widow
over the house. Dulcie had mentioned it specially, because Mrs.
Stapleton had evinced such evident interest in it.

I checked my train of thought, focussing my mind upon that single
incident.

Mrs. Stapleton, the "mysterious widow" of whom nobody appeared to know
anything, had been strangely interested in that hiding-hole and in all
that Sir Roland had said about it--Dulcie had told me that. The
hiding-hole was in close proximity to Sir Roland's bedroom, and to one
other room from which valuable jewellery had been stolen. Mrs. Stapleton
had left the neighbourhood on the day after the robbery, had been absent
ever since--that of course might be, and probably was, merely a
coincidence. At supper at Gastrell's reception in Cumberland Place Mrs.
Stapleton had acknowledged "Mrs. Gastrell's" smile of recognition, and
an instant later the two women had stared at each other stonily, and
Mrs. Stapleton had assured me that she did not know the other woman,
that she had "never seen her before." Then those two men, of whom
Osborne had just spoken, had of their own accord joined him and "Mrs.
Gastrell" at supper, and eventually he had gone with the men to their
flat in Bloomsbury. And now here was an unseen man, evidently a
scoundrel, inquiring the whereabouts of a safe in a country house
belonging to a nobleman known to be extremely rich, and asking in
particular if the house possessed a priests' hiding-hole, and if so,
exactly where it was located--a man who threatened evil if the
information were withheld. Could all this, I could not help wondering,
be mere coincidence? Then on the top of it came that extraordinary
telegram sent to Dulcie from London, with my name attached to it.

Jack, however, had not done relating his adventures, so I turned again
to listen to him.

"A third thing the fellow asked," he said, "was the name of Hugo
Salmonsteiner's bankers--Salmonsteiner the millionaire timber-merchant
whose son was out big-game shooting with me a year ago. It seemed an
absurd question, for surely it must be easy to find out who any man's
bankers are, but still he asked me, and appeared to be most anxious
that I should tell him. Oh, but there were scores of other questions,
all much on the same lines, and tending to extract from me information
of a peculiar kind."

"Did you answer any of them?" Easterton asked.

"Answer them? Why, of course--all of 'em. I didn't want to remain here
in durance vile an hour longer than I could help, I can assure you. But
naturally my answers were--well, 'inaccurate,' to say the least. I had
to word them very carefully, though, or the fellow would have caught me
out. He suspected that I might be misleading him, I think, for once or
twice he put questions which might have unmasked me if I had not been on
my guard when answering them. Really we pitted our brains and cunning
against each other's all the time, and, if I may say so without
boasting, I think my cunning won."

"Then why were you not released?" I said.

"I was to have been, to-night--_so he said_. Do you think, though, he
would, whoever he was, have let me go after questioning me like that? He
said not a word about my not giving information to the police, or
warning the people he had questioned me about. Do you think he would
have let me go? I don't.

"Every day food and drink were left by me--set on a table within reach
of me, while the room was in inky blackness, for the man who had touched
me in the dark had also released my right arm and left it so. Several
times I tried to free my other arm, and my feet, but I couldn't manage
it. I have been lying here with both feet and one arm bound for four
nights and three days, to my knowledge, without seeing anybody, and, of
course, without shaving or washing. I can't tell you what these days and
nights have been like--they have been like a long, awful nightmare;
even the house has all the time been as still as death. My God, what a
relief it was to hear the door bell ringing this afternoon, and the
knocker going as though the place was on fire!

"And when the police did force an entrance it seems they found nobody
but me!"




CHAPTER VIII


MORE SUSPICIONS

Women are extraordinary--a platitude, of course, for everybody who has
mixed with women and who possesses a gleam of intelligence knows that
they are extraordinary, just as he knows, or ought to know, that if they
were not _bizarre_ and mystifying, complex and erratic, they would be
less insidiously captivating than they are.

There are, however, exceptions to most rules--some misguided _savant_ of
a bygone epoch formulated a maxim which says that "the exception proves
the rule," obviously an absurd statement, for if one man has no nose on
his face it is no proof that all other men have noses on theirs. Aunt
Hannah constituted an exception to the rule that women are rendered
additionally attractive through being extraordinary. Had she been less
extraordinary she would have been more lovable. As it was she came near,
at this time, to being the reverse of lovable, or so it struck me when,
upon my endeavour to talk calmly and rationally to her after hearing all
that Jack Osborne had just told us, and striving to induce her to listen
to reason, she remained prejudiced, illogical.

I should not have cared a button, naturally, had it not been for Dulcie
and the estrangement between us that the foolish old lady's behaviour
created. Dulcie thought no end of her aunt, respected her views and
sentiments--she had been brought up to do so, poor child--and, I knew,
really loved her. "Well," I said to myself tartly, "she will now have to
choose between Aunt Hannah and me," and feeling cock-sure, after all
that had occurred between us, that I should be the favoured one and that
Aunt Hannah would be metaphorically relegated to the scrap-heap, I
decided to approach Dulcie at once.

No, first I must see the original of that telegram, I reflected.
Accompanied, therefore, by the police officer, I made my way to the post
office in Regent Street. Having explained that I wanted to see the
original of the telegram "because," as I said, "I think a mistake has
been made in transcribing it," I was presently confronted by the
postmaster, a most courteous, obliging person.

"Why, certainly," he said, when I had repeated my untruth. "You shall
see it at once."

I waited in anxious expectancy, chatting lightly with the policeman,
while the postmaster looked through the file of the day's messages.

"This is it, I think," he said presently--we were in his private room.
"But," he went on, glancing from the message that had been sent to the
original, "your original message is unsigned. Is that the alleged
mistake of which you complain?"

"Unsigned!" I exclaimed, taking both papers from him. "Why yes, so it
is! Then how does that message that was sent off come to be signed?"

The original message was type-written. The wording was exactly the same
as that in the telegram received, with this exception--the telegram
received was signed "Michael Berrington," the typed message had no
signature.

"How do you account for this discrepancy?" I asked quickly.

"If you will kindly wait a moment," he answered, "I will inquire into
this."

He left the room. The policeman, to whom I had handed both messages,
was still contemplating them with a look of perplexity in his round
eyes, when the postmaster returned, bringing with him an
intelligent-looking girl.

"This," he said, "is the young lady who transmitted the message."

I am afraid I smiled. How long, I wonder, will post-office assistants,
and shop girls, bar tenders, and others continue to be "young ladies,"
while ladies in the correct sense of the word never think, when talking
of one another, of using terms more distinctive and dignified than
"girl" and "woman"?

"Do you remember my sending this telegram this morning?" I asked,
looking her full in the eyes.

"I remember taking in the message, but I'm afraid I don't remember your
face, sir," she answered nervously, evidently afraid that I was about to
get her into trouble. "You see, we see so many people, and most of them
only for a few moments. I recall rather clearly taking in that message,
because it was typed, which most telegrams are not. And--and I thought
it was handed in by a lady, and not by a gentleman. In fact I feel sure
it was. Was it really you who gave it to me to send off?"

"No, it was not," I answered quickly. "A lady? Can you remember what she
was like?"

"I can. She was, I think, really the most beautiful lady I have ever
seen. She was quite tall, as tall as a man, and she had a lovely figure.
It did seem to set off her beautiful clothes so well. Then her face was
lovely too--long, dark eyebrows she had, if I remember rightly, and her
eyes were large. Oh, and she had a lot of auburn hair--red you might
almost call it--I don't know which it was really, but I never saw
such hair."

"Good!" I exclaimed.

I turned to the policeman.

"She has described beyond doubt a woman I know; a woman you will
probably soon know something about too."

"Indeed, sir?" he said, interested.

"But about this signature," I went on, again addressing the operator.
"How does this telegram you sent off come to be signed if the original
was not signed?"

"It was signed, sir. It must have been. Otherwise the name wouldn't have
been telegraphed. Ah--I remember!"

"Remember what?"

"The signature was in pencil. Just after the telegram had been
despatched, the lady came in again and asked if she might see the
message again just for a moment--she was not sure if she had said
something she had meant to say, she said. I got it and gave it to her,
and a moment or two afterwards she gave it back to me, thanking me very
much for having let her see it. She must have rubbed off the signature
then. She could do it easy with a damp finger. Of course, I ought to
have looked, but I didn't think to."

"I think we have now solved the mystery--in part," I exclaimed
triumphantly. "This is some abominable conspiracy, and I am going to get
to the bottom of it. My name was evidently signed, telegraphed, and then
purposely obliterated."

After thanking the postmaster for his extreme courtesy and for the
trouble he had taken, and impressing upon him that under no
circumstances was the bright-eyed little operator to be censured, or
allowed to get into any trouble, I returned with the policeman, who was
now quite apologetic, to the house in Grafton Street. The door was
locked. A constable standing by, however, told us that Osborne and
Easterton had driven away together in a car--"his lordship's car, which
his lordship had telephoned for," he said, and that "the two ladies had
gone to the Ritz for tea"--he had heard them say, as they walked away,
that they were going there.

Alone I followed them. I know my way about the Ritz as though I lived
there, being there so often with friends, and I soon found Aunt Hannah
and Dulcie. They were alone in a cosy private tea-room leading out of
one of the large rooms which is but seldom used, having tea.

I saw Aunt Hannah stiffen as I approached. I saw too--and this disturbed
me far more--that Dulcie had been weeping. Her eyes were still
quite moist.

"What do you wish, Mr. Berrington?" Aunt Hannah inquired starchily,
sitting bolt upright in her chair as I approached.

I detest the use of the word "wish" in place of "want"; I don't know
why, but I always associate it with prim, prudish, highly-conventional
old ladies.

"I have come to explain everything, and to set your mind at rest," I
said, trying to speak lightly, and intentionally saying "mind" instead
of "minds," for I did not want Dulcie to suppose that I thought she
shared her aunt's grotesque belief in this matter--the belief that I
actually had sent that hateful telegram.

"I hope you will succeed," Aunt Hannah observed, then shut her lips
tightly.

She did not offer me a cup of tea, but I feigned not to notice this
paltry affront, and proceeded briefly to relate what had just taken
place at the post office. At last, when I had, as I thought, completely
cleared my character, I stopped speaking. To my surprise the old lady
remained as unbending as ever.

"I don't know why I've gone to the trouble of telling you all this," I
said, hiding the mortification I felt, "but you see, at any rate, that I
_had_ an explanation to offer, though I grant you that at present it can
only be a partial one. That is no fault of mine, however."

"'Partial'--yes, it certainly is that," muttered the old lady.

Aunt Hannah has small green eyes, and they seemed to snap. She still sat
up stiffly, her entire aspect rigid.

"This," I thought, "is the limit. Decidedly the moment of battle has
arrived"--indeed, the initial encounter had already taken place. I don't
mind confessing that my spirit quailed--for an instant. Then, realizing
that I was "up against it," my courage returned. My engagement to Dulcie
hung in the balance. I must face the music.

Perhaps at first I overdid it, but something is to be conceded to
nervousness. Aunt Hannah kept tapping her teaspoon against her saucer
with nervous little taps. The constant "small noise" was very
irritating. Determined to stop it, I leant suddenly forward across the
little table, till my face was close to Aunt Hannah's. Anger boiled in
my heart. Sympathy for Dulcie rose up and flooded my mind. Though I
allowed my most charming "boudoir" smile to overspread my face, it was
all I could do not to seize hold of that old lady and shake her.
Inwardly I craved to grasp her lean wrists in a firm grip, and force her
to listen to reason. "A dear" Dulcie had sometimes called her. "A dear"
she might be when in a nice mood, but in the peevish vein she was now
in, her obstinacy held a particularly maddening quality.

"You know," I said, still smiling hypocritically, "you are really
_trying_ to disbelieve me now. You are trying to make mischief between
Dulcie and me--and you enjoy it," and I glanced in the direction of my
darling, whose eyes were shining strangely. "Why don't you answer?" I
went on, as Aunt Hannah remained silent; I could hear her gulping with
rage. At last she spoke:

"What impudence--what unwarrantable impudence!" The words were shot from
between her teeth. "You--you dare to speak to me like this--you--you--"

"After all, Miss Challoner," I cut in, "it's true. I no more sent that,
or any telegram, to Dulcie than I am flying over the moon at this
moment. And if you still disbelieve me, at least tell me why. Yes, I
must know. Don't evade an answer. You have something else in your mind,
I can see that, and I am not going to rest until I know what that
something is."

"Oh, you very rude young man," she burst out. "Yes, you shall know what
it is! If, as you say, the telegram was not sent by you--and I suppose I
must believe you--why was it not sent to Sir Roland? Such a telegram
should have been sent to him, and not to his daughter--if the stolen
property had been found, it was for him to come to Town, or even for me
to, but certainly it was not Dulcie's place to go gallivanting about in
London. Now, I maintain it was sent to Dulcie because the sender knew
Sir Roland to be away from home--and who, but you, knew him to be away?
He left only yesterday, and he should return to-night. You knew
because, so my niece tells me, she told you in a letter that he was to
leave home for a day."

"My niece!" Really, Aunt Hannah was qualifying for _opera bouffe!_ Just
then she knocked her spoon so loudly against her cup that it
startled me.

"Don't worry, Dulcie," I said, seeing how distressed she looked. "You
believe I didn't send it, anyway--I don't mind what anybody else
thinks," I added spitefully. "The mystery will be cleared up sooner or
later, and 'he laughs longest ...' you know the rest. Only one thing I
wonder," I ended, again facing Aunt Hannah, "if you thought that, why
did you bring Dulcie up to town? Why didn't you leave her at Holt, and
come up alone?"

"I will tell you why," she snapped back. "Because, wilful and
disobedient as she has always been, she refused to stay at Holt and let
me come up alone."

Dulcie looked at me without answering, and I read love and confidence in
her eyes. That was all I really cared to know, and the look afforded me
immense relief.

I felt there was no good purpose to be served by remaining there longer,
so after shaking hands warmly with Dulcie--to the manifold disapproval
of Aunt Hannah, who stared at me frigidly and barely even bowed as I
took my leave--I sauntered out into Piccadilly.

My thoughts wandered. They were not, I must say, of the happiest.
Obviously there was an enemy somewhere--it might be enemies. But who
could it be? Why should I have, we have--for Dulcie suffered equally--an
enemy? What reason could anyone have for wishing to make Dulcie, or me,
or any of the Challoners, unhappy? Everybody I knew who knew them seemed
to love them, particularly the tenantry. Sir Roland was looked up to
and respected by both county people and villagers for miles around Holt
Stacey, while Dulcie was literally adored by men and women alike, or so
I believed. True, old Aunt Hannah sometimes put people out owing to her
eccentricities and her irascible temper, but then they mostly looked
upon her as a rather queer old lady, and made allowances for her, and
she had not, I felt sure, an enemy in the country-side.

As for myself, well, I could not recollect ever doing any particularly
bad turn--I had my likes and dislikes among the people I knew,
naturally. Then suddenly a thought struck me--my engagement to Dulcie.
Could that be--

I smiled as I dismissed the thought--it seemed too grotesque. No; once
and for all I decided that the whole affair could have nothing to do
with any kind of personal animosity. Criminals were at work, desperate
criminals, perhaps, and Osborne and Dulcie and I had chanced to prove
very useful as pawns in some scheme of theirs for securing plunder. I
glanced at my watch. It was just five o'clock. Concluding that Jack
Osborne must now be at his rooms, I drove to the Russell Hotel. Yes, he
particularly wanted to see me; would I please go up at once, the clerk
said when he had telephoned up my name and my inquiry if Mr. Osborne
were at home to anybody.

Easterton was with him still; a doctor was on the point of leaving as I
entered the room where Jack sat in his dressing-gown in a big chair,
drinking a cup of soup. Already he looked better, I thought, than when I
had seen him at the house in Grafton Street, barely two hours before.

After exchanging a few remarks with him, and being assured by Easterton
that the doctor had said that Jack might now see anyone he pleased, I
came straight to the question of the telegram, repeating to him almost
word for word what I had told Aunt Hannah.

For nearly a minute after I had stopped speaking he did not utter. He
appeared to be thinking deeply, judging by the way his brows were knit.
Then, suddenly looking straight at me, he said:

"Mike, I don't like this business--I don't like it at all. There's
something radically wrong about the whole thing. Now, look here, you
know that when I say a thing I mean it. Therefore I tell you this--I am
going to set to work, as soon as I have quite recovered from the
nightmare I have been through, to discover what is happening. I am going
to solve every detail of this mystery, and if there is some gang of
scoundrels at work committing burglaries and what not--because I feel
quite sure this affair is in some way connected with the robbery at
Holt--I am going to get them convicted. The doctor tells me I shall be
perfectly all right in a couple of days. I have nothing to do. You have
nothing to do. Will you join me in this attempt I am going to make to
track these men down? I hear it said that you are engaged to be married
to Dulcie Challoner. If that's so, then you should be even more anxious
than I am to get this gang arrested--the police say it must be a gang.
They have looted some thousands of pounds' worth of jewellery which
practically belonged to Dulcie Challoner. Think what it will mean to her
if through your efforts all that is restored to her. Besides, she will
think you a hero--I mean an even greater hero than she already considers
you, most likely; I confess I don't agree with her, old man. You are a
very good chap--but a hero? No. Say, then, will you help me in this
search? It may prove exciting too; on the other hand, it may not."

Jack's breezy manner and almost boyish enthusiasm appealed to me. After
all, I had, as he said, nothing on earth to do--I often wished I
had--and I was rather keen on anything that might lead to or savour of
adventure. Though I was engaged to Dulcie, there were family reasons why
the marriage could not take place at once, and then I thought again of
what Jack had just said about the stolen jewels--Dulcie was still
greatly upset at their loss, and there was even the possibility, I
thought with a smile, that if I were directly or indirectly responsible
for their recovery Aunt Hannah might eventually deign again to smile
upon me--which would, of course, give me great joy!

"Yes, old chap," I said, "I'll do anything you jolly well like. I'm sick
of doing nothing."

"First rate!" he answered. "Then that's settled. I've all sorts of ideas
and theories about the Holt Manor robbery and this affair of mine, and
that telegram to-day, and other things that have happened--some you know
about, some you don't. I have a friend who was for twenty years at
Scotland Yard--George Preston, wonderful chap, knows London upside-down
and inside-out, and now he's kicking his heels with nothing to do he'll
be only too glad to earn a bit. You might ring him up for me now, and
ask him to come here to-morrow."

Somebody knocked, and I went to the door, Jack having told me that he
did not want to see anybody likely to bore him.

It was only an hotel messenger. The clerk in the office had tried to
ring up the room, he said, but could get no answer. Turning, I saw that
Jack had forgotten to replace the receiver the last time he had spoken.

"What do you want?" I asked.

The messenger said that a "young gentleman" had just called. He wanted
to see "a Mr. Berrington" who was probably with Mr. Osborne.

"What about?" I said. "And didn't he give his name?"

"He wouldn't say what about, sir, though he was asked. He said it was
'most important.' He said to say 'Mr. Richard Challoner.'"

"Dick!" I exclaimed. "Good heavens, what is Dick doing up in London? Oh,
go down," I said to the messenger, "and send him up at once."

"It's Dick Challoner," I said, turning to Osborne and Easterton, "Sir
Roland's boy, the little chap I told you about who behaved so pluckily
when the thieves at Holt got hold of him. I wonder what _he's_ doing in
town, and why he wants to see me."

Then I sat down, lit a cigarette, and waited. I little suspected what an
amazing story I was about to hear.




CHAPTER IX


THE SNARE

Dick's face bore a broad grin as he entered the room. He looked
dreadfully mischievous. Assuming as serious an expression as I could
conjure, I said to him:

"Why, what's the meaning of this, Dick? How do you come to be in town?
Are you with Aunt Hannah?"

"It's all right--brother-in-law," he answered lightly. "No, I am not
with Aunt Hannah, nor is Aunt Hannah with me. I have come up on my own."

"'On your own'? What do you mean?"

"I'll tell you, but--won't you introduce me, Mike?"

"Easterton," I said, "this is Roland Challoner's boy, Dick. Jack, this
is the boy I told you about who was chloroformed by the thieves
at Holt."

Jack's eyes rested on Dick. Then he put out his hand.

"Come here, old chap," he said in his deep voice. For several moments he
held Dick's hand in his while he sat looking at him.

"Yes," he said at last, "I have heard about you--Dick. I heard about
what you did that day those men caught you. Keep that spirit up, my
boy--your family has never lacked pluck, if history is to be
trusted--and you'll become one of the kind of men England so badly
needs. What are you doing in London? Is your father with you?"

"No, I have come up on my own," Dick repeated. "I am going to tell Mike
why, in a moment. Are you Mr. Jack Osborne that Mike is always talking
to my sister about, who took Mike to that house--the house where the
fire was?"

"Yes, I am," Jack answered, laughing. "Why?"

"Oh, because my sister didn't like your taking Mike there, you know--she
didn't like it a bit. She and Mike are going to be married, you know,
and Mike is going to be my brother-in-law."

I pounced upon him to make him be quiet, though Easterton and Osborne
clamoured that he should be left alone and allowed to say anything he
liked, Jack declaring that he wanted to hear "more of this romance."

At last we all became serious, and then Dick said:

"I made a discovery this morning at Holt. There is someone hidden in the
old hiding-hole close to father's bedroom."

"Hidden in it!" I exclaimed. "Oh, nonsense!"

"Your telegram to Dulcie arrived at about half-past ten this morning,"
he went on, not heeding my remark, "and she and Aunt Hannah at once got
ready to go to town--I know what was in the telegram, because Dulcie
told me. About an hour after they were gone, I happened to go up to
father's bedroom to fetch something, and when I came out again I noticed
an odd sound--at first I couldn't think where it came from. It was like
someone breathing very heavily, someone asleep. I stood quite still, and
soon I found that it came from the priests' hiding-hole--you know it,
you have seen it. I went over on tip-toe, got into the angle where the
opening to the hole is, and pressed my ear down on the sliding board. I
could hear the sound quite well then--somebody breathing awfully
heavily. First I thought of sliding back the board and peeping in. Then
I decided I wouldn't do that until I'd got somebody else with me. I
noticed that the sliding board was unbolted--there is a little bolt on
the side of it, you know--so I very quietly pushed forward the bolt and
then went downstairs to look for James or Charles--that's the butler and
the footman, you know," he said to Jack. "Cook told me they had both
gone into Newbury for the day, and of course father's chauffeur was out
with the car--he had taken Aunt Hannah and Dulcie to Holt Stacey to
catch the train to London, and I knew that he would take a day off too,
because he always does when he gets the chance--father isn't expected
back until to-night. So then I went to try to find Churchill, or one of
the other gardeners--goodness knows where they were hiding themselves.
Anyway, I couldn't find them, nor could I find either of the keepers; in
fact, I seemed to be the only man on the place."

"Well, go on," I said, as he paused. "You were the only man on the
place. What did the only 'man' do then?"

"I'll tell you if you'll wait a moment--my brother-in-law is always so
beastly impatient," he said, turning again to Jack. "Don't you find him
like that, Mr. Osborne?"

"I do--always. But go on, old boy, I'm very interested."

"And so am I," Easterton laughed.

"Of course, it was no use telling cook or the maids; they'd have got
what cook calls 'styricks' or something, so then it suddenly struck me
the best thing for me to do would be to come right up to town and find
Aunt Hannah and tell her. I knew where she'd be, because you'd said in
your telegram--four hundred and thirty Grafton Street. I didn't know
where Grafton Street was, but I thought I could find out--I borrowed
money from cook for the railway ticket, though I didn't tell her what I
wanted it for, or she wouldn't have given it to me, and directly after
lunch I bicycled to Holt Stacey station and caught the train.

"I got to Grafton Street all right by a 'bus down Bond Street. There was
a policeman standing near the house in Grafton Street, and when I rang
the bell he came up and asked me what I wanted. I told him, and he said
he thought I'd find 'the two ladies I wanted' at the Ritz Hotel. I knew
where that was, and he showed me the way to get to it, down Dover
Street--of course, if I'd had money enough I'd have taken taxis and got
about much quicker. A giant in livery at the Ritz Hotel told me that
'two ladies answering to the description of the ladies I sought' had
left the hotel about a quarter of an hour before I got there, and he
didn't know where they had gone. Then I went to Brooks's to see if you
were there, but you weren't, though they said you'd been there. That put
the lid on it. I didn't know what to do, and I'd only got tenpence
ha'penny left. I was awfully hungry, so I went and had tea and buns at
the A.B.C. shop at Piccadilly Circus. While I was having tea I
remembered hearing you tell Dulcie that Mr. Osborne lived at the Russell
Hotel. I'd have telephoned to Mr. Osborne and explained who I was and
asked him if he could tell me where I could find you, and I'd have
telephoned too to your flat in South Molton Street to ask if you were
there, but I'd got only fivepence ha'penny left after tea, and you might
both have been out and then I'd have had only a penny-ha'penny and
Paddington seemed an awfully long way to walk to, and I wasn't quite
sure of the way, so I'd have had to keep asking, and that's such a
bore, isn't it?

"So after tea I got on to the tube and came here and asked for Mr.
Osborne. The man downstairs told me 'two gentlemen were with him,' and I
asked him what they were like. He told me as well as he could, and I
guessed from the description one of them must be you, and then just
after the messenger had come up to ask if it was you and to tell you I
was there, another hotel man turned up downstairs, and I talked to him,
and he said he knew a Mr. Berrington was with Mr. Osborne because he,
the man, had telephoned up your name a little while before, and Mr.
Osborne had said to show you up. And so here I am, and that's all."

He stopped abruptly, breathless after his long talk, which had been
delivered without an instant's pause.

"For your age you seem fairly intelligent," Jack said, with a look of
amusement.

"Yes, fairly," Dick retorted. "But my brother-in-law says that 'when he
was my age' the world was a much better and finer place, that the boys
did wonderful things--'when he was my age.' He says, for instance, that
he talked Latin and Greek and German and French and one or two other
languages just as you talk English, Mr. Osborne, 'when he was my age'--
funny how he has forgotten them all, isn't it? My sister told me only
yesterday that Mike talks French fluently, but that his German 'leaves
much to be desired.' Those were her words. Were all the boys wonderful
when you were my age too, Mr. Osborne, can you remember? Another thing
Mike says is that 'when he was my age' all boys were taught to swim by
being taken to the ends of piers and flung into the sea--Mike says he
was taught like that just as the rest were, and that he jolly well had
to swim or he'd have been drowned, which seems pretty obvious, doesn't
it, when you come to think of it? When did the fashion of teaching boys
to swim like that go out, Mr. Osborne? I'm jolly glad it has gone out."

When I had succeeded in checking Dick's flow of talk and quelling his
high spirits, and had questioned him further with regard to the man he
declared to be in hiding at Holt--though without my being able to obtain
from him any further information--I turned to Jack.

"What do you make of it?" I said. "What do you suggest ought to be
done?"

"I think," he answered after a moment's pause, "that it affords an
excellent excuse for you to run down to Holt to-night."

"Oh, good!" Dick exclaimed, jumping with excitement. "And there's a
train at a quarter to seven that we can catch; it gets to Holt Stacey at
five minutes to eight."

Jack glanced up at the clock.

"In three quarters of an hour's time," he said. "That will suit you,
Mike, and you'll be glad, I know, of the excuse to go down to Holt to
see the flowers and--and things. Don't think I suppose for a moment that
you want to see either Dulcie Challoner or the old lady you call 'Aunt
Hannah,' but still if you should see them, and of course you will--"

"Oh, he'll see them right enough," Dick burst out, "especially my
sister. There aren't any flies on my brother-in-law, you bet!"

I boxed Dick's ears, but he didn't seem to mind. Perhaps I didn't box
them very hard, for instead of howling as he ought to have done, he
looked up at me sharply and exclaimed:

"Then you're coming down to Holt now! Hooray! We'll go down
together--how ripping! I'll telephone to say you're coming, and say to
get your room ready," and he sprang across to the instrument by
the bedside.

I stopped him, gripping him by the shoulder, though not before
he had pulled off the receiver and called through to the
operator--"Trunks, please!"

"You'll do nothing of the sort," I said, "and look here, Dick, you are
in Mr. Osborne's rooms, and not in your own play-room, so don't
forget it."

I felt greatly preoccupied as the train sped down to Berkshire--anxious,
too, about many things, not the least of these being how I should be
received. Would Sir Roland have returned? Would Aunt Hannah have told
him everything? If so would he have adopted her view with regard to the
sending of that telegram, and with regard to other matters? And Dulcie,
would she at last have come to think as Aunt Hannah thought? I could not
believe she would have, but still--

As I have said, women are so extraordinary, that there is no knowing
what they may not do, no accounting for what they may do.

Knowing there would be no conveyance obtainable at Holt Stacey, I had
decided to go on to Newbury. On our alighting at Newbury I suddenly
heard Dick's shrill voice calling:

"Why, Mike, there's father!"

Sir Roland had just got out of a compartment further up the train, and
soon we were in conversation. He too had come from London, but whereas
Dick and I had only just caught the train, Sir Roland had, he said,
entered it as soon as it came into the station, which accounted for our
not having seen him at Paddington. As we walked along the Newbury
platform I explained to him very briefly the reason I had come down, and
how it was I had Dick with me, inwardly congratulating myself upon my
good fortune in thus meeting Sir Roland and so being able to explain
everything to him concerning what had happened that day, before he
should meet his sister and hear what she would tell him.

"It was only at the last moment I decided to come by this train," Sir
Roland said as he entered the taxi that a porter had hailed, and I
followed him, while Dick hopped in after us. "How tiresome it is one
can't get a conveyance at Holt Stacey; people are for ever complaining
to me about it. As I have not telegraphed for the car to meet me I had
to come on to Newbury."

"I came to Newbury for the same reason," I said; and then, as the taxi
rolled swiftly along the dark lanes, for we had a twelve miles' run
before us, I gave Sir Roland a detailed account of all that had happened
that day, from the time Easterton had rung me up at my flat to tell me
of Jack Osborne's disappearance and to ask me to come to him at once,
down to the sudden and unexpected arrival of Dick at Jack's rooms at the
Russell Hotel.

Sir Roland was astounded, and a good deal perturbed. Several times
during the course of my narrative he had interrupted in order to put
some question or other to Dick. At first he had reproved him for going
to London on what Dick called "his own"; but when I told him more he
admitted that what the boy had done he had done probably for the best.

"Oh, I haven't told you one thing," Dick suddenly interrupted.

"Well, what?" Sir Roland asked.

"While I was on my way to Holt Stacey this morning, Mrs. Stapleton
passed me in her car. I was on that part of the road, about a mile from
the lodge, where if you look round you can see a long bit of the avenue.
I wondered if Mrs. Stapleton were going to Holt by any chance, so I
bicycled rather slowly for a minute or two, and looked round once or
twice. I had guessed right, because all at once I saw her car going up
the avenue."

"Are you sure it was Mrs. Stapleton?" I asked, suddenly interested.

"Oh, quite. But I don't think she saw me, her car went by so fast."

"Was anybody with her?"

"No, she was alone--the chauffeur was driving."

"And the car that went up the drive, are you sure it was the same?"

"Positive--that long grey car of hers, I'd know it anywhere; you can
recognize it ever so far away."

We were half a mile from the lodge, now. Soon we had shot through the
open gates, and were sliding up the splendid avenue. I felt intensely
excited, also happier than when in the train, for I knew I now possessed
Sir Roland's entire confidence. Delicious was it to think that in a few
minutes I should see Dulcie again, but what excited me--and I knew it
must be exciting Sir Roland too--was the thought of that man--or would
it prove to be a woman?--lying concealed in the hiding-hole. Who could
he be? How long had he been there? How had he got there and what could
he be doing?

I had told Sir Roland of the false conclusion Aunt Hannah had come to
with regard to the sending of that typed telegram, and how bitterly she
had spoken to me about it--I had thought it best to prepare him for the
absurd story that I felt sure Aunt Hannah would proceed to pour into his
ear directly she met him. To my relief he had laughed, appearing to
treat the matter of her annoyance and suspicion as a joke, though the
sending of the telegram he looked upon, naturally, as a very grave
matter. Consequently, upon our arrival at Holt, instead of inquiring for
his sister, and at once consulting her upon the subject of the day's
events, as he would, I knew, have done under ordinary circumstances, he
told Charles, the footman, to send the butler to him at once, and to
return with him.

We were now in the little library--Sir Roland and myself, Dick, the
butler and the footman, and the door was shut. Without any preliminaries
Sir Roland came straight to the point. He told the two servants of
Dick's discovery that morning, told them that presumably the man was
still in hiding where Dick had bolted him down, and that the four of us
were at once going, as he put it, "to unearth the scoundrel."

"And you will stay here, Dick," Sir Roland added. "We shall not need
your services at this juncture."

Dick was, I could see, deeply disappointed at, as he put it to me in an
undertone, "being side-tracked like this by the guv'nor when it was I
who marked the beggar to ground "; but his father's word was law, and
he knew it.

"Never mind, my dear old chap," I said, as I noticed a slight quiver of
the under lip, "directly we've unearthed him and got him safely bagged
I'll come and tell you what he looks like and all about him. You see,
your father doesn't want to run unnecessary risk--you're the only boy
he's got, and this man may be armed. You would be annoyed if the fellow
were to make holes in you, and I should be vexed too; greatly vexed."

Dick laughed at that, and when, a minute later, we left him, he was
happier in his mind.

No sound was audible as we stood above the priests' hole, listening
intently. This hiding-place was oddly situated, and ingeniously
constructed. In an angle formed by two walls with old oak wainscoting
was a sliding floor--in reality it was a single board, but it was made
to resemble so exactly several boards set parallel and horizontally that
none could believe it to be a single board unless they were shown.
Immediately beneath was a room, or closet, not much bigger than a very
large cupboard, which could accommodate three men standing, or two
seated. In olden days this sliding board was covered with tapestry, and
being made in such a way that, when stamped upon or struck, no hollow
sound was emitted, it formed a safe place of concealment for any
outlawed person for whom the emissaries of the law might be in search.
To this day the board slides away into the wall as "sweetly" as it did
in the days of the Reformation; but Sir Roland, owing to an accident
having once occurred through someone leaving the hole uncovered, had
affixed a small bolt to the board and given orders that this bolt should
always be kept pushed into its socket.

When we had all stood listening for fully a minute, Sir Roland said
suddenly:

"Charles, draw the bolt and slide back the board--get back, James!" he
exclaimed sharply to the butler, who in his anxiety to see what would be
revealed was bending forward.

"D'you want to be shot? Whoever the man may be he is pretty sure to be
armed."

An instant later the board had vanished into the wall, and Sir Roland
stood peering down exactly as he had warned his butler not to do.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed.

Casting prudence aside, we all pressed forward and looked down into the
hole. Huddled in a heap at the bottom was a man in hunting kit--white
breeches, top boots and "pink" coat. Sitting along the floor, he was
bent almost double, so that we could not see his face.

"Hello!" Sir Roland called out, "who are you? What are you doing there?"

But the figure didn't move.

At one end of the hiding-hole a ladder was nailed vertically. The feet
of the man touched its lowest rung. Turning, Sir Roland began carefully
to descend.

"Let me, sir!" the butler exclaimed excitedly, "let me--it's not
safe--he may attack you, sir!"

Without answering Sir Roland continued to clamber down. Now he stood
upon the floor of the hiding-hole, at the foot of the figure. We saw him
stoop, raise the man's head, and bend the body upward until the back
rested against the other end of the hole.

An exclamation escaped us simultaneously. The face was that of a man of
twenty-seven or so, though the stubbly beard and moustache, apparently a
week's growth or more, at first gave the idea that he was much older.
The eyes were closed and sunken. The mouth gaped. The face was deathly
pale and terribly emaciated.

"By Gad!" gasped Sir Roland, as he took hold of the wrist and felt for
the pulse. "My Gad, I think he's dead!"




CHAPTER X


NARRATES A CONFESSION

Half an hour later the man found in the hiding-hole lay upon a bed in
one of the spare rooms.

Though not dead, he had, when discovered, been in the last stage of
exhaustion. The doctor telephoned for had at once discovered that what
we already suspected was true--the man's left ankle was very badly
sprained. It must, he said, have been sprained ten or twelve days
previously. In addition, the man was almost like a skeleton.

"You found him not an hour too soon," the doctor said when, after
completing his diagnosis, and giving instructions concerning the
treatment of his patient to the nurse who had just arrived, he rejoined
us in the smoking-room downstairs. "He is in a state of complete
collapse. For days he has evidently not touched food."

He looked at us in turn with an odd expression as he said this. He was
clearly mystified at finding a man at Holt Manor dying of starvation--a
starving man dressed for the chase, a man obviously of refinement, and
undoubtedly to be described as a gentleman.

Sir Roland decided under the circumstances to tell the doctor
everything: how the man's presence had been discovered by Dick, how we
had afterwards found him lying upon the floor of the hiding-hole,
apparently dead, and how, with the help of ropes, we had finally pulled
him out. The doctor had, of course, heard of the robbery at Holt nearly
a fortnight before, and he at once put two and two together.

For two days the stranger quivered between life and death. Two nurses
were in constant attendance, and the doctor called frequently. It was on
the afternoon of the third day that he expressed a desire to talk to Sir
Roland; he had, until then, been allowed to speak only a word or two.

He wanted, he said, "to speak with Sir Roland alone"; but to this Sir
Roland would not agree.

"If you want to speak to me, you can speak quite freely before this
gentleman," he said; I was in the room at the time.

At first the man seemed distressed, but at last, finding that Sir Roland
would make no concession, he said in a weak voice:

"I'm dying, Sir Roland, I feel it, and before I go there are things I
should like to say to you--things that it may be to your advantage
to hear."

His voice, I noticed, had in it the _timbre_ peculiar to the voices of
men of education.

"Say anything you like," Sir Roland answered coldly.

"You have been exceedingly kind to me: there are men who, finding me in
concealment as you found me, and after what has happened in this house,
would at once have called in the police. You may believe me or not, but
I am extremely grateful to you. And I want to show my gratitude in the
only way I can."

He paused for nearly a minute, then continued:

"Sir Roland, I will tell you as much as I am justified in telling about
the robbery; but first, has anybody concerned in it been arrested?"

Sir Roland shook his head.

"Nobody--as yet," he answered. "The police have not discovered even the
smallest clue."

"I and another were in your bedroom when your son suddenly sprang from
behind the screen," the stranger went on. "Again you may believe me or
not, but I tried to prevent my companion from doing him any injury. It
was I who put the chloroform on the boy, but I did him no other harm, I
swear, sir."

I saw Sir Roland's eyes blaze. Then, as his glance rested upon the
stranger's starved, almost ashen face--it seemed to be gradually
growing livid--the sternness of his expression relaxed.

"How came you to be in hiding here?" he asked abruptly. "How many
accomplices had you?"

"Seven," the stranger replied, without an instant's hesitation. "The
robbery was carefully planned; it was planned so carefully that it
seemed without the bounds of possibility that it could fail to succeed.
I and others were at your hunt breakfast--"

"Were your accomplices all men?" I interrupted sharply.

The man's stare met mine. He looked at me with, I thought, singular
malevolence.

"They were not," he answered quietly. He turned again to Sir Roland.
"Just after your son had been rendered unconscious, I had the misfortune
to slip up on the polished floor and sprain my ankle badly. No sooner
did my companion realize what had happened, than he snatched from me all
the stolen property I held, in spite of my endeavour to prevent him,
then emptied my pockets, and left me. Dismayed at being thus
deserted--for unless I could hide at once I must, I knew, quickly be
discovered--I crawled out of the room on all fours, and along the
landing as far as the angle where the hiding-place is. The hole was
open--we had opened it before entering your room, lest we might be
surprised and suddenly forced to hide. Almost as I reached it I heard
somebody coming. Instantly I scrambled down and slid the board over
my head."

"How came you to know of the existence and the whereabouts of the
hiding-hole at all?" Sir Roland inquired, eyeing the stranger
suspiciously.

"That I do not wish to tell. I hoped ultimately to be rescued by my
accomplices, and for that reason I made no sound which might have
revealed my presence. My ankle had swollen considerably, and, confined
in my riding-boot, which I couldn't pull off, it gave me intense pain.
To clamber out unaided was consequently an impossibility; so there I
lay, slowly starving, hoping, night after night, that my accomplices
would force an entrance into the house and rescue me, for my companion
who left me must have guessed where I was in hiding--we had agreed, as I
have said, to seek concealment in that hole should either of us be
driven to hide in order to escape detection."

"Was the man who deserted you the man who deliberately strained my boy's
arm by twisting it?" Sir Roland asked.

"Yes."

"What is his name?"

"Gastrell--Hugesson Gastrell, that's the name the brute is known by. He
always was a blackguard--a perisher! I shall refuse to betray any of the
others; they are my friends. But Hugesson Gastrell--don't forget that
name, Sir Roland. You may some day be very glad I told it to you--the
man of The Four Faces!"

He paused. He seemed suddenly to be growing weaker. As we sat there,
watching him, I could not help in a sense feeling pity for the fellow,
and I knew that Sir Roland felt the same. It seemed terrible to find a
man like this, quite young--he was certainly under thirty--a man with
the unmistakable _cachet_ of public school and university, engaged in a
career of infamy. What was his life's story I wondered as I looked at
him, noting how refined his features were, what well-shaped hands he
had. Why had he sunk so low? Above all, who was he? for certainly he was
no ordinary malefactor.

Suddenly he turned on to his back, wincing with pain as he did so; he
had been lying partly on his side.

"I can't betray my friends, Sir Roland," he murmured, "but believe me
when I say I am deeply grateful for your kindness to me. I was not
always what I am now, you know," his voice grew weaker still; "not
always an adventurer--a criminal if you will. Yes, I am a criminal, and
have been for many years; unconvicted as yet, but none the less a
criminal. I was once what you are, Sir Roland; I took pride in being a
gentleman and in calling myself one. Educated at Marlborough and at
Trinity--but why should I bore you with my story--eh, Sir Roland? Why
should I bore you with, with--ah! The Four Faces! The Four Faces!"
he repeated.

His eyes rolled strangely, then looked dully up at the ceiling. What did
he mean by "The Four Faces"? Did he refer to the medallion worn by
Gastrell? His mind was beginning to wander. He muttered and murmured for
a minute, then again his words became articulate.

"Jasmine--oh, Jasmine my darling, I love you so!"

I started.

"Jasmine, if only you would ... oh, yes, that is all I ask, all I want,
my darling woman, all I ... you remember it all, don't you? ... yes ...
oh, it was her fault ... he wouldn't otherwise have killed her ... oh,
no, discovery is impossible, the ... it was quite unrecognizable.... The
Four Faces--ha! ha! ... I myself saw it, black, charred beyond all hope
of recognition ... he did right to ... dear, I should have done
the same...."

Between these scraps of sentences were words impossible to catch the
meaning of, so indistinctly were they uttered, some being said beneath
his breath, some muttered and inarticulate, some little more than
murmurings.

He moved restlessly on the bed. Then his eyes slowly closed, and for a
minute he lay still. And then, all at once, he seemed to spring back
into life.

"Mother!" he shouted suddenly in quite a strong voice.

He started up in bed, and now sat erect and still, his wide-stretched
eyes staring straight before him.

The nurse had, at Sir Roland's request, left the room before the
stranger had begun to speak to him. Now, opening the door quickly, Sir
Roland called to her to return.

The stranger's eyes were fixed. Motionless he sat there glaring, as it
seemed to us, at some figure facing him. Instinctively we followed the
direction of his gaze, but naught was visible to us save the artistic
pattern upon the pink-tinted wall-paper opposite the foot of the bed.

His lips were slightly parted, now. We saw them move as though he spoke
rapidly, but no words came. And then, all at once, he smiled.

"The Four Faces!" he repeated, almost inaudibly.

It was not a vacant smile, not the smile of a man mentally deficient,
but a smile charged with meaning, with intelligent expression; a smile
of delight, of greeting--a smile full of love. It was the first time we
had seen a smile, or anything approaching one, upon his face, and in an
instant it revealed how handsome the man had been.

"Mother!"

This time the word was only murmured, a murmur so low as to be barely
audible. The fellow's pyjama jacket, one Sir Roland Challoner had lent
to him, had become unfastened at the throat, and now I noticed that a
thin gold chain was round his neck, and that from it there depended a
flat, circular locket.

Sir Roland was seated close beside the bed. Almost as I noticed this
locket, he saw it too. I saw him bend forward a little, and take it in
his fingers, and turn it over. I could see it distinctly from where I
sat. Upon the reverse side was a miniature--the portrait of a woman--a
woman of forty-five or so, very beautiful still, a striking face of
singular refinement. Yes, there could be no doubt whatever--the eyes of
the miniature bore a striking likeness to the stranger's, which now
gazed at nothing with that fixed, unmeaning stare.

I had noticed Sir Roland raised his eyebrows. Now he sat staring
intently at the miniature which lay flat upon the palm on his hand. At
last he let it drop and turned to me, while the stranger still sat
upright in the bed, gazing still at something he seemed to see
before him.

"I believe I have discovered his identity," Sir Roland whispered. "I
recognize the portrait in that locket; I couldn't possibly mistake it
seeing that years ago I knew the original well. It's a miniature of
Lady Logan, who died some years ago. Her husband, Lord Logan, was a
gambler, a spendthrift, and a drunkard, and he treated her with
abominable cruelty. They had one child, a son. I remember the son
sitting on my knee when he was quite a little chap--he couldn't at that
time have been more than five or six. He went to Marlborough, I know;
then crammed for the army, but failed to pass; and yet he was
undoubtedly clever. His father became infuriated upon hearing that he
had not qualified, and, in a fit of drunkenness, turned him with curses
out of the house, forbidding him ever to return, in spite of Lady
Logan's pleading on the lad's behalf. The lad had from infancy been
passionately devoted to his mother, though he couldn't bear his father.
The mother died soon afterwards--of a broken heart it was said--and Lord
Logan survived her only a few months, dying eventually of _delirium
tremens_. Upon his death the little money he left was swallowed up in
paying his debts. The son, whose name was Harold, didn't show up even at
the funerals--none knew where he was or what had become of him. It was
generally believed that he had gone abroad, and Logan's executors
thought it probable that the son had not had news of either his mother's
or his father's death. Altogether it was a very sad story and--"

He checked himself, for the stranger had turned his head and was looking
at us--never shall I forget the infinite pathos of his expression at
that moment. There was something in the face which betrayed misery and
dejection so abject that for days afterwards the look haunted me. Again
I saw the lips move, but no sound came.

He had sunk back upon his pillows. Once more his eyes gazed fixedly at
the ceiling. Some moments later the mouth gaped, the lips turned slowly
blue, a dull, leaden hue spread over the pale features.

The nurse hurried forward, but there was nothing to be done. Harold
Logan, Lord Logan's wastrel son, was dead.




CHAPTER XI


CONCERNS MRS. STAPLETON

Ten days had passed since the events I have set down in the previous
chapter, and still no clue of any kind had been obtained to the robbers
at Holt, or the perpetrators of the outrage at the house in Grafton
Street. Nor, indeed, had any light been thrown upon the mystery of the
forged telegram, while the incident of the discovery of the charred body
of a murdered woman among the _debris_ of the house in Maresfield
Gardens destroyed by fire on Christmas Eve had, to all intents, been
entirely forgotten.

In the firelight in a small room leading out of the large library,
Dulcie and I sat and talked. Perched on the broad arm of a giant padded
chair, swinging her small, grey-spatted feet to and fro, she glanced at
me moodily, replying in monosyllables to most of my remarks. Presently I
rose with a gesture of annoyance, and began to pace the floor.

It was not a comfortable atmosphere by any means--metaphorically. In
point of fact, Dulcie and I quarrelled.

We had quarrelled during our afternoon walk over the hard-frozen snow to
a neighbouring hamlet to take a deserving widow a can of soup, and old
"Captain" Barnacle in Wheatsheaf Lane a promising Christmas pudding.

The cause of our quarrel was a curious one. Though Aunt Hannah appeared
to have overcome her belief concerning the telegram she had felt so
certain I had sent, I felt that she was now prejudiced against me--why,
heaven only knew. Her manner towards me, as well as her expression, and
the way she spoke to me, all betrayed this. Women dislike being proved
to be in the wrong even more than men do, and the conclusion I had come
to was that Aunt Hannah would never forgive my having, in a sense, made
her eat her words and look ridiculous. It was on the subject of Aunt
Hannah, then, that Dulcie and I had begun our quarrel, for Dulcie had
stood up for her when I condemned her--that I condemned her rather
bitterly, I admit. From that we had presently come to talk of Mrs.
Stapleton, for whom Dulcie had suddenly developed a most extraordinary
infatuation.

On the morning that Dick, on his way to the station, had passed Mrs.
Stapleton in her car, Mrs. Stapleton had called at Holt and asked to see
Dulcie. At that moment Dulcie was in the train with Aunt Hannah, on her
way to London in response to the telegram. The widow had then asked to
see Aunt Hannah Challoner, and then Sir Roland.

Upon hearing that all three were absent from home, she had asked if she
might come into the house to write a note to Dulcie, and the maid who
had opened the door to her--the butler and footman having, as we know,
gone into Newbury--had politely but firmly refused to admit her,
declaring that she had orders to admit nobody whomsoever.

This refusal had apparently annoyed Mrs. Stapleton a good deal, and on
the same evening she had called again, and again asked to see Dulcie,
who by that time had returned. It was while she was alone with Dulcie
in her boudoir that Sir Roland and Dick and I had returned to Holt, and
that the stranger--whom we now knew to have been Lord Logan's son--had
been discovered in the hiding-hole. Mrs. Stapleton had remained with
Dulcie over an hour, and during that hour it was that she had apparently
cast the spell of her personality over Dulcie. It was on the subject of
this infatuation of Dulcie's that Dulcie and I had ended by quarrelling
rather seriously.

"I won't hear a word said against her," Dulcie suddenly declared
impetuously, kicking her heel viciously against the chair. "I think she
is the most fascinating woman I have ever met, and the more you abuse
her the more I shall stand up for her--so there."

"Abuse her!" I answered irritably. "When did I abuse her? Repeat one
word of abuse that I have uttered against her. You know quite well that
I haven't said a syllable that you can twist into abuse. All I have said
is that I mistrust her, and that I think it a pity you should for ever
be metaphorically sitting on her skirts, as you have been during the
past few days."

"And you don't call that abuse?" Dulcie retorted. "Then tell me what you
do call it."

"I myself like Mrs. Stapleton up to a point," I answered, evading the
question. "She is capital company and all that, but--"

"But what?" Dulcie asked quickly, as I hesitated.

"But who is she? And where does she come from? How is it that nobody
about here, and apparently nobody in town either, knows anything at all
about her? Such an attractive-looking woman, young, apparently well off,
and a widow--surely somebody ought to know something or other about her
if she is quite--well, quite all right. It's most singular that she
shouldn't have any friends at all among our rather large circle of
acquaintance."

"I shall tell her just what you have said about her," Dulcie exclaimed
quite hotly. "I never thought you were that kind, Michael--never. You
pride yourself upon being broadminded--you have often told me so--and
yet because Tom, Dick and Harry don't know all about poor Mrs.
Stapleton--who her husband was, who her parents were, and where she
comes from--you immediately become suspicious, and begin to wonder all
sorts of horrid things about her."

"My dear Dulcie," I said, becoming suddenly quite calm, so anxious was I
to soothe her at any cost, for I hated our falling out like this, "you
put words into my mouth I never spoke, and thoughts into my mind which
never occurred to me. I have said only one thing, and I shall say it
again. I mistrust Mrs. Stapleton, and I advise you to be on your guard
against her."

The door opened at that moment, and Charles, entering, announced:

"Mrs. Stapleton."

"Oh, Connie, how glad I am you've come!" Dulcie burst out, jumping off
the arm of the big chair impetuously, and hurrying forward to meet the
widow, who at once embraced her affectionately. "We were just this
instant talking about you. Isn't that strange?"

"And I hope not saying nasty things, as I have reason to believe some of
my 'friends' do," Mrs. Stapleton answered, with a charming smile,
casting a careless glance at me. "But, of course, I couldn't imagine you
or Mr. Berrington saying anything unpleasant about anybody," she added
quickly; "you are both much--much too nice."

This was heaping coals of fire upon me, and I believe I winced as
Dulcie's eyes met mine for a brief instant and I noticed the look of
scorn that was in them. She did not, however, repeat to Mrs. Stapleton
what I had just said about her, as she had threatened to do. Instead,
she slipped her arm affectionately through the young widow's, led her
over to the big arm-chair, made her sit down in it, and once more
perched herself upon its arm.

"Ring for tea, Mike, like a dear," she said to me. Her tone had
completely changed. Once more she had become her own, delightful self.
This sudden _volte-face_ did not, I must admit, in the least surprise
me, for I knew what a child of moods she was, how impulsive and
impetuous, and I think I loved her the more because she was like that.

We now formed, indeed, quite a merry trio. By the time tea was finished
Connie Stapleton's magnetic personality must, I think, have begun to
affect me to some extent, for I found myself wondering whether, after
all, I had not been mistaken in the opinion I had formed that she was a
woman one would be well-advised not to trust too implicitly--become too
intimate with.

"And your jewels, dear!" she suddenly asked, as though the recollection
of the robbery had but at that instant occurred to her. "Have you
recovered any of them? Have the police found any clue?"

"Yes," Dulcie answered at once, "the police have a clue, though, as yet,
none of the stolen things have been recovered."

"Indeed?" I exclaimed. "Why, Dulcie, you never told me. What is it? What
is the clue?"

"I forgot to tell you; at least, I should have told you, but you've been
so snappy all the afternoon that I thought there was no need," Dulcie
answered equivocally. "Well, the clue is merely this. When
Churchill--that's the head gardener, you know," she said to Mrs.
Stapleton--"was sweeping away the snow in the drive at the back of the
house, that narrow drive which leads down to the lane that joins the
main road to Newbury, just by Stag's Leap, he saw something shining on
the ground. He picked it up and found it was a buckle, set in diamonds,
as he thought, so when he brought it to me of course he was tremendously
excited--he made sure it was one of the stolen bits of jewellery. As a
matter of fact, it was one of a set of very old paste buckles which
belonged to my mother, and those buckles were among the stolen things."

"When did he find it?" Mrs. Stapleton asked, interested.

"Why, only a few hours ago--it was just after lunch when he came to me,
and he had then only just found it. You see, the ground has been covered
with snow ever since the day of the robbery; that was the last day
we hunted."

"Did the gardener say anything else? Has he any theory to account for
the buckle being there?"

Again it was Mrs. Stapleton who put the question.

"None, Connie," Dulcie answered. "At least, yes," she corrected, "he has
a sort of theory, but I don't think much of it. That narrow drive is
rarely used, you know; the gate into the lane is nearly always
locked--it was unlocked and the gate set open the day the hounds met
here in order to save people coming from the direction of Stag's Leap
the trouble of going round by the lodge. I don't think, all the same,
that many people came in that way."

"I don't see much 'theory' in that," I observed drily. Somehow I could
not shake off the feeling of irritability that my quarrel with Dulcie
during the afternoon had created.

"Naturally, because I haven't yet come to the theory part," Dulcie
answered sharply, noticing the tone in which I spoke. "I am coming to it
now. Churchill says he happened to come along that drive between about
eleven o'clock and half-past on the morning of the meet--that would be
just about the time when everybody was at the breakfast--and he
distinctly remembers seeing a car drawn up close to the shrubbery. There
was nobody in it, he says, but as far as he can recollect it was drawn
up at the exact spot where he found the buckle this afternoon. Of
course, there was no snow on the ground then."

"Has he any idea what the car was like?"

As Connie Stapleton made this inquiry I happened to glance at her. I
could only see her profile, but there was, I thought, something unusual
in her expression, something I did not seem to recollect having ever
seen in it before. It was not exactly a look of anxiety; rather it was a
look of extreme interest, of singular curiosity.

"Churchill is most mysterious and secretive on that point," Dulcie
answered. "I asked him to tell me what the car was like, if he had any
idea whose it was. He said it was a grey car, but he wouldn't tell me
more than that. He said he believed he had 'hit the line,' and would
soon be on a 'hot scent.' Try as I would, I couldn't get him to say
another word. He asked if he might have this afternoon off, and gave me
to understand he wanted to go into Newbury. I believe he is going to try
to do a little detective work," she ended, with a laugh; "but, as I say,
I don't put much faith in any theory Churchill may have formed."

"Well, my dear Dulcie, if you succeed in recovering your jewellery you
know I shall be the first to congratulate you," Mrs. Stapleton said,
taking Dulcie's hand and patting it affectionately. "It is too dreadful
to think all those lovely things should have been stolen from you,
things of such exceptional value to you because of their long
association with your family. Oh, how stupid of me," she suddenly said,
interrupting herself, "I have forgotten to tell you what I have come to
see you for. I have some friends from town dining with me to-night--some
of them are going to stay the night at 'The Rook,' the others will
return to town in their cars--and I want you and Mr. Berrington to join
us. It's quite an informal little dinner party, so I hope you will
forgive my asking you in this offhanded way and at such short notice.
The fact is, two people telegraphed at lunch time that they wouldn't be
able to come, so I thought that if I motored over here I might be able
to persuade you to come instead. Will you come, dear? And you, Mr.
Berrington? Do say 'yes.' Don't disappoint me when I have come all this
way out to try to persuade you--if I were not really anxious that you
should join us I should have telephoned or telegraphed!"

"Of course--why, I shall love to come!" Dulcie exclaimed, without a
moment's hesitation. "And, Mike will come--I know he will."

"You mean he won't be able to let you be away from him so long," Connie
Stapleton said mischievously, and there was something very peculiar in
her laugh. It flashed across me at that moment that for an instant or
two she looked a singularly wicked woman.

Dulcie smiled self-consciously, but said nothing. I knew that she rather
disliked any joking allusion being made to our engagement.

"May I use your telephone, darling Dulcie?" Connie Stapleton asked
suddenly. "I want to tell the hotel people that we shall be the original
number. I told them after lunch that we might be two short."

Dulcie had a telephone extension in the little room which adjoined her
boudoir, and some moments later Mrs. Stapleton was talking rapidly into
the transmitter in her smooth, soft voice. She spoke in a tongue that
neither of us understood, and when, after she had conversed for over
five minutes, she hung up the receiver, Dulcie called out to her gaily:

"Why, Connie, what language was that?"

'Polish,' she answered. "Didn't you recognize it? Of course, you know
that I am Russian."

"Russian! Why, no, I hadn't the least idea. I always thought you were
not English, although you speak English perfectly. I remember wondering,
the first time I met you, to what nationality you belonged, and I came
to the conclusion that possibly you were Austrian."

"No, Russian," Mrs. Stapleton repeated. "I have a Polish maid who speaks
hardly any English, and I was talking to her. And now, my dear, I really
must be going. What is the exact time?"

It was five minutes past six. Dulcie pressed the electric button.

"Mrs. Stapleton's car at once," she said, when the footman entered.

A few minutes later Mrs. Stapleton's long grey Rolls-Royce was gliding
noiselessly down the avenue, over the snow, its tail lights fast
disappearing into the darkness.




CHAPTER XII


THE BROAD HIGHWAY

Had Dulcie consulted me before accepting Mrs. Stapleton's invitation to
dinner I should have improvised some plausible excuse for declining. She
had not, however, given me the chance of refusing, for she had then and
there accepted for both of us unconditionally, so that I could not,
without being rude, make any excuse for staying away.

"Dulcie," I said, when we were again alone, "I wish you hadn't accepted
that invitation without first of all consulting me. I really am not
keen to go."

"Oh, don't be silly!" she exclaimed joyously, and, putting her arms
about my neck, she gave me three delicious kisses. "We have quarrelled
all the afternoon--you were perfectly horrid to me, you know you
were--and if we mope here together all the evening we shall most likely
fall out again, and that will be absurd. Besides, I feel just in the
humour for a jolly dinner party, and I'm sure any party given by Connie
is bound to be jolly, just as jolly as she is. I _do_ think she is such
a fascinating person, don't you, Mike? Oh, I am sorry; I quite forget
you don't like her."

"I have not said I don't like her--I do like her, Dulcie, in a sense,
and up to a point. But I still hold to the opinion I formed of her when
I met her first--I wouldn't trust her implicitly."

"Never mind, Mike," she cried in high spirits. "We'll set all your
prejudices aside to-night, and try to enjoy ourselves. I wonder who'll
be there. I quite forgot to ask her."

"Probably nobody you know, or she would have told you. She said 'friends
from town,' so there are not likely to be any of our friends from about
here. We ought to start soon after seven, as she said dinner would be at
eight; with the snow as thick as it is it may take us quite an hour to
get to Newbury--twelve miles, remember."

We were the last to arrive, and I confess that the moment we were shown
into the room and I realized who Mrs. Stapleton's other guests were I
mentally upbraided myself for having come, or rather, for having let
Dulcie come. The first to whom our hostess introduced Dulcie was "Mrs.
Gastrell," and directly afterwards she presented to Dulcie "Mrs.
Gastrell's cousin," as she called him--none other than Hugesson
Gastrell, who was standing by. To my surprise Easterton and Jack Osborne
were there, and the widow seemed pleased at finding that I knew them--I
guessed it was owing to Easterton's being there that Jasmine Gastrell
was made to pass as Gastrell's cousin.

With singular formality she made Dulcie and me acquainted with
everybody, which struck me as odd in these days when introductions at
dinner parties, receptions and balls have gone quite out of fashion.

"Mr. Berrington," Mrs. Stapleton said, taking me across the room to two
men engaged apparently in earnest conversation, "I want to make you and
Lord Cranmere and Mr. Wollaston known to one another," and,
interrupting them, she introduced us.

There was nothing striking about the Earl of Cranmere. A man past middle
age, he had, I thought a rather weak face. A small, fair beard, neatly
trimmed and pointed, concealed his chin: as I looked at him I wondered
whether, were that beard removed, I should see any chin at all. The
short upper lip was hidden by a fair moustache; he had also whiskers.
The fair hair, which was rather thin on the top, was carefully parted in
the middle, and plastered down on both sides. His complexion was clear,
the complexion of a man who lives a good deal in the open, and his eyes
were pale blue, with almost golden lashes and eye-brows. He inclined to
stoutness, and spoke with a slight lisp. This then was the man, or
rather one of the men, I thought, as I noted these points about him
while we exchanged remarks, concerning whom Jack Osborne had been so
mysteriously questioned while he lay bound upon the bed in that dark
room in Grafton Street. I knew Lord Cranmere to be a particular friend
of Jack's, though in appearance no two men could have presented a
greater contrast.

What mostly kept my thoughts busy, however, was the presence of Hugesson
Gastrell.

Since his name had been mentioned by Harold Logan on his dying bed, I
had carefully debated whether or not to tell Easterton, who had let him
his house, what I now knew about him; also whether to tell Sir Roland
Challoner that Osborne and I had actually met Gastrell. Unable to
decide, I had put the case to Osborne, and eventually we had decided to
say nothing, at any rate for the moment, to anybody at all.

"What would be the good?" Jack had argued. "You have the word of a
dying man, and that's all; and what is there that you can prove against
this man Gastrell--at present? Besides, if you say anything, you may
find yourself forced to reveal that you know who the dead man was, that
you know him to have been Lord Logan's son, and you told me that Sir
Roland wants particularly to avoid doing that. No, keep silent and await
developments, that's my advice, as you have asked for it. He'll probably
end by hanging himself if you give him rope enough. I wouldn't tell even
Dulcie, if I were you."

I was thinking of all this again, when my train of thought was suddenly
cut by a voice at my elbow:

"Mr. Berrington, I want to introduce you to Mrs. Gastrell. Come with me,
will you?"

I turned abruptly. Connie Stapleton was at my elbow, and she spoke in
soft, purring tones.

"She's the woman you asked me if I knew, the other night at Mr.
Gastrell's reception," she went on in an undertone, as we walked towards
the woman. "I was introduced to her a couple of nights later. She is a
cousin of Mr. Gastrell's."

Almost before I had time to collect my thoughts, she had introduced me,
adding, a moment later, with one of her charming smiles:

"And will you take Mrs. Gastrell in to dinner?"

I was debating whether or not to refer to our previous meeting, at
Maresfield Gardens, when Mrs. Gastrell herself solved the difficulty.

"I wonder," she said, her great eyes very wide open, her gaze resting
full on mine, "if you remember that we have met before. It was just
before Christmas. You and Mr. Osborne called in the middle of the night
to ask if Hugesson had lost his purse: we both thought it so kind
of you."

I remembered a good deal more than that, but I did not tell her so. I
remembered too that she had seemed to speak sarcastically, almost
mockingly, that night when she had said she thought it kind of Jack to
have come out "all that way" just to inquire if Gastrell had
accidentally left his purse at the club. She appeared now, however, to
mean what she said, and so I only answered:

"How, having met you once, Mrs. Gastrell, could I forget our meeting?
What rather astonishes me is that you should remember me by sight,
seeing that we spoke for a few minutes only."

She smiled in acknowledgment of the compliment, and I found myself
wondering how many men that terribly alluring smile of hers had enslaved
from first to last.

"Would you believe it," she went on almost without a pause, "we were
very nearly burnt in a dreadful fire that broke out in that house on
Christmas Eve. We only just managed to escape with a few of our
belongings; we had not, I am thankful to say, anything very valuable
there, because the house had been sub-let to us, so that the furniture
was not ours."

"You certainly were fortunate, in a sense," I answered, marvelling at
her self-possession, and mentally asking myself if she spoke with
conviction and whether I had, after all, formed a wrong opinion about
her as well as about our hostess. Then I heard Gastrell's voice behind
me, and that brought me to my senses. If such a man were a guest of Mrs.
Stapleton's it seemed quite on the cards that men and women of equally
bad character might also be included among her friends. I had several
reasons for suspecting Mrs. Gastrell of duplicity, and I determined to
remain on my guard.

The dinner, I confess, was excellent. I was glad to see that Dulcie sat
between Jack Osborne and Lord Easterton, and was thus out of harm's way.
We dined at a round table, and almost facing me were two
unintelligent-looking women--I had heard their names, but the names
conveyed nothing to me. These women, both past middle age, somehow had
the appearance of being extremely rich. They sat on either side of
Hugesson Gastrell, whose conversation appeared to be amusing them
immensely. One other woman made up the party of twelve--a dark, demure,
very quiet little person, with large, dreamy eyes, a singularly pale
complexion, and very red lips. She was dressed almost simply, which the
other two women certainly were not, and altogether she struck me as
looking somewhat out of place in that _galere_.

Champagne flowed freely, and gradually we all became exceedingly
vivacious. Once, when I glanced across at Dulcie, after conversing
animatedly for ten minutes or so with the beautiful woman at my side, I
thought I noticed a troubled look in her eyes, but instantly it
disappeared, and she smiled quite happily. Then, turning to her
neighbour, Jack Osborne, she said something to him in an undertone which
made him laugh, and he too looked across at me. It had struck me all the
evening that Jack was in exceptionally high spirits, and more than once
I had wondered if he had some special reason for being so.

It was an extraordinary dinner party. The more I looked about me, the
more astonishing it seemed. A stranger entering the room would have
noticed nothing unusual; he would have seen a number of apparently quite
ordinary men and women dining, and enjoying themselves, people rather
more sociable, perhaps, than the guests at dinner parties often are. And
yet I had reason to believe that among these ostensibly respectable
people three at least there were whose lives were veiled in a mystery of
some sort--I hoped it might be nothing worse. The opinion I had formed
of our hostess is already known. In addition there was that strange
young man, Hugesson Gastrell, who, knowing everyone in London, was, in a
sense, known by no one. For what did anybody know about him? Questioned,
people invariably answered that he came from Australia or Tasmania and
had inherited a large fortune from an uncle. That was all. They knew
naught of his parents or his antecedents; his private life was a
closed book.

My glance rested on my neighbour's white, well-manicured hands. Several
times already, during dinner, I had observed how graceful they were, and
had noticed the long, slender fingers, the well-shaped, polished
nails--fingers on which precious stones shone and sparkled as the rays
cast down from beneath the shades of the subdued electric lamps touched
them at frequent intervals. Suddenly a thought flashed in upon me, and
involuntarily I caught my breath. The voice of a dying man was calling
to me, was crying a name in my ears as it had done that day I had sat
with Sir Roland Challoner by Harold Logan's bed and watched the fearful
eyes gazing into vacancy.

"Jasmine ... it is all I ask, all I want, my darling woman ... wouldn't
otherwise have killed her ... it was her fault ... oh, no, discovery is
impossible ... black, charred beyond all hope of recognition ... did
right to kill her, dear, I ..."

The sound of the voice--I seemed to hear it distinctly in spite of the
conversation and laughter all around--and the picture which rose
simultaneously into the vision of my imagination, made me recoil. My
gaze was set again upon those pale, graceful hands with their blue
veins, their scintillating gems. As in a dream I heard Jasmine Gastrell
in conversation with Cranmere, seated upon her other side; heard, too,
his silly talk, his empty laughter. Her hands seemed now completely to
hold my gaze. I could not look away. And, as I watched them, the feeling
of revulsion rose.

Conjectures, suspicions, hideous thoughts filled my brain as my eyes
remained riveted. Now the fingers looked like snakes--strange,
flesh-tinted reptiles with eyes emerald green and ruby red, cruel,
sinuous. Now great knots of muscle stood out upon her bare arms. Her
hands were clutching something--what it was I could not see. The fingers
grew twisted and distorted ... they had crimson stains upon them ... the
very nails were shot with blood and I thought I saw--

My train of thought was cut by my neighbour on my right. What she said I
hardly knew, and did not care. Still, I was glad that she had spoken.
The interruption had diverted my attention, and brought my thoughts from
dreamland back into actual life.

Then the thought came to me, What was the object of this dinner party?
Why had Connie Stapleton invited these people down to Newbury? Why, if
she wished to give a dinner party, had she not given it in town? From
the conversation during dinner I had gathered that the guests, one and
all, lived in London. It seemed strange therefore to the verge of
eccentricity to ask them to come fifty miles to dine. True, the
_cuisine_ at "The Rook" was above reproach, the hotel itself excellently
appointed, but none the less--

"Don't you agree, Mr. Berrington?" Mrs. Gastrell exclaimed, laughing as
she turned from Cranmere to me.

"I didn't catch the question," I said with a start, again brought
suddenly to earth.

"Lord Cranmere is of opinion that the man you found in hiding at Holt
must, from the descriptions which have been given of him, at some time
or other have been a gentleman. I say, 'No; that no gentleman could sink
so low as to become a common criminal of that kind.' One can understand
a gentleman, by which I mean a man of education and careful upbringing,
being driven, through force of circumstances, to rob a bank, or even to
forge a signature to a cheque; but for such a man to sink to the level
of a common housebreaker is unthinkable--don't you agree with me?"

Her eyes shone strangely as they rested upon mine. Not until now had the
wonderful intelligence in their purple-green depths struck me so
forcibly. From the orange-tinted lamps before her on the table the light
which shone up in her face seemed to increase their brilliance,
accentuate their expression and their power. It imparted, too, to her
extraordinary complexion a peculiar, livid tint, while the masses of her
burnished, red-brown hair, coiled about her head in great ropes and
dressed low in her neck, was shot with a chestnut shade which greatly
enhanced its beauty.

I paused before answering. For fully ten minutes she had not addressed
me, so deeply engaged had she been in conversation with Lord Cranmere.
Why should she all at once interrupt her talk and put this question to
me? None but Sir Roland Challoner and I were aware of the dead man's
identity; even we had no actual proof that he had been Lord Logan's son,
though our discovery of the locket, considered in relation to certain
facts known to Sir Roland, left no room for doubt. That locket Sir
Roland had appropriated in order that the dead man's identity might not
be traced and the family name tarnished. Jasmine Gastrell must of course
be aware of his identity? Did she suspect that I knew his name, and
could this be an attempt to entrap me into revealing that I knew it?

"That is a question difficult to answer," I said guardedly. "I believe
there are instances on record of men of education, of men even of good
birth, sinking to the lowest depth of degradation when once they had
begun to tread the downward path. It would be interesting to know who
that man really was. He wouldn't tell his name, wouldn't even hint
at it."

"So that of course you don't know it."

"Naturally."

Again that keen, searching expression in the large, luminous eyes. They
seemed to look right through me. They seemed to read my thoughts and
wrest my secrets from me.

"And you found nothing upon him that might have given you a clue, I
suppose; nothing in his pockets, no marks upon the body, there was
nothing he was wearing that might have put you on the track?"

"Absolutely nothing," I answered, thinking of the locket as I looked
straight into her eyes. Never before had I realized how cleverly I
could lie.

It was close on midnight when we all assembled in the hall preparatory
to leaving--those of us who were leaving. Hugesson Gastrell had left
long before, in fact immediately after dinner, as he had, he said, an
important appointment in London. Somebody nudged me lightly as he
brushed past, and glancing round I caught Osborne's eye. He made no sign
whatever, yet there was something in his look which made me think he
wanted me, and a minute later I sauntered after him into the room where
the hats and coats had been.

But for us, the room was now deserted. Glancing quickly to right and
left, Jack walked over to a corner where a tall screen stood. There was
nobody behind it.

He beckoned to me, and I approached.

"We are among a set of scoundrels," he said rapidly, under his breath.
"I am glad to see that you too didn't recognize him."

"Recognize whom?" I asked in astonishment, also speaking in a whisper.

"Preston, the ex-detective. I introduced him to you the last time we met
in town."

"I remember the man perfectly, but surely he isn't here."

Jack's lips stretched into a grin.

"'Lord Cranmere,'" he said. "That's Preston!"

He chuckled.

"Cranmere's own brother was actually deceived when we brought the two
together, as a test," he went on. "Preston is a genius. He doesn't
merely 'make up' to look like someone else; he doesn't, when he is made
up, just impersonate the character; for the time he _is_ the man, he
'feels like him,' he says, he shares his views, he becomes his other
ego. He has the advantage in this case of knowing Cranmere well, and he
has, in consequence, excelled himself to-night. The way he has hit off
Cranmere's lisp is marvellous. Easterton, who meets Cranmere frequently,
is at this moment in the hall arguing with Preston about land taxation
and small holdings, under the impression that he is talking to Cranmere.
It really is rather amusing."

When I had expressed my astonishment, and we had talked for a minute or
two, he suddenly grew serious.

"But remember, Mike," he said, laying his hand upon my shoulder, "nobody
knows this--nobody but you and I. Preston has assured me that the
success of our efforts to run the leaders of this gang to ground--he
tells me he is sure there is a gang working together and playing into
one another's hands very cleverly--will largely depend upon our
discreetness and our secretiveness, also upon our tact and our knowledge
of when to act. So not a word, mind; not a syllable even to Dulcie
Challoner--have I your promise?"

Dulcie and I talked but little as we sped homeward through the darkness.
She seemed depressed, I thought, though she assured me that she had
thoroughly enjoyed herself and was feeling quite well. I must say that
the "mental atmosphere" of that party had affected me unpleasantly,
though I could not have said precisely why.

On and on the car travelled, smoothly, almost noiselessly. Snow was
falling--it had been falling for two hours, the chauffeur had told us
before we started--though not very heavily. The night was quite still.
We had long passed the tiny hamlets a mile or two from Newbury and were
now on the five miles' stretch of winding road between there and Holt
Stacey. Soon we passed the sign-post close to Holt Stacey railway
station. As we sped through the village some moments later the houses
and cottages all wrapped in darkness seemed to spring forward into the
light one after another as though to peer at us as we shot by.

Now Holt Stacey lay behind us, and only four miles remained. From the
time we had left Newbury no vehicle of any kind had passed us, nor any
human being, nor had we overtaken any. Dulcie, nestling close to me in
the warm, comfortable brougham, was more than half asleep. I too felt
drowsy, and I fear that more than once my chin had dropped forward with
a jerk. Suddenly the car swerved abruptly to the right. So tightly were
the brakes applied at the same instant that we were both thrown forward
almost on to the floor. The car lurched, rose up on one side, then as I
instinctively threw my arms about Dulcie to protect her if possible from
what seemed about to be a very serious accident, the car righted itself
and stopped dead.

"Good heavens! What has happened?" I exclaimed, as the chauffeur, who
had sprung off his seat, opened the door. Dulcie still lay in my arms,
trembling with fear, though from the first she had not uttered a sound,
or in the least lost her head.

"Someone lying in the road, sir," he answered, "drunk, I shouldn't
wonder. He was half covered with snow, and I all but ran over him."

"Lying in the snow! Why, he'll die if he's left there," I exclaimed. "Go
and have a look at him, and then come back to me."

Several minutes passed, and the chauffeur did not return. Becoming
impatient, I opened the door of the brougham, and called out. A moment
later the man appeared. The electric torch he carried--one he used when
occasion arose to examine the car in the dark--was still switched on.
The hand that held it trembled a little, and in the light which shone
down inside the brougham I noticed that the chauffeur looked
singularly pale.

"Could you kindly step out for a moment, please, sir?" he said in a
curious tone.

Guessing that something serious must be amiss to prompt him to ask me
to step out into the deep snow in my evening shoes, I got out at once,
in spite of Dulcie's entreating me not to do so and get my feet soaked.

When I had shut the car door, and we had walked a few paces, the
chauffeur stopped abruptly.

"Sir," he said in a hoarse voice.

"Well, what?" I asked, also stopping.

"Sir--it's Churchill, the gardener. Poor fellow! It's awful! He's dead,
sir, quite cold. He--he's been killed--_murdered_!"




CHAPTER XIII


THE BARON

Coming so soon after the robbery at Holt, the brutal murder of Sir
Roland's head gardener created an immense sensation throughout both
Berkshire and Hampshire--for the Holt Manor estate, though actually in
Berkshire, is also upon the border of Hampshire. The London papers, too,
devoted much space to the matter, the problem they set their readers to
solve being: whether the murder could have any bearing upon the robbery.
Some of the leading journals declared that both crimes must have been in
some way related; others urged that this was most unlikely, and then
proceeded to "prove" the accuracy of their own individual reasoning.

The man had been done to death in a peculiarly horrible manner. He had
been hit upon the back of the head with some heavy implement--probably a
"jemmy" the police said when the wound, with the wounds upon the
forehead, had been examined beneath a microscope. The theory they held
was that some person had crept up unheard behind the victim--as this
could easily have been done with snow so thick upon the ground--stunned
him with a blow upon the back of the head, and then despatched him
outright by blows upon the forehead. No footsteps were anywhere
visible, the falling snow having hidden them.

Churchill's movements during that afternoon had in part been traced.
Directly after taking to Dulcie the buckle he had found and obtaining
her permission to absent himself for the afternoon, he had walked to
Holt Stacey, and there caught the 4:05 train to Newbury. He had
exchanged the time of day with the ticket-collector at Newbury, who had
taken the half of his ticket. The return half had afterwards been found
in the dead man's pocket. Where he had been, or what he had done,
between 4:20--from the time he left Newbury station, on foot--and 6:10,
when he had looked in at the "Dog and Clown" and had a drink and a chat
with the landlord, was unknown. He had not told the landlord why he was
in Newbury, or said anything concerning his movements in that town.

The fact of his having bought a return ticket showed that he had
intended to return to Holt Stacey by train. But he had not gone back by
train. The last train for Holt Stacey left Newbury at 9:11, and at 9:30
he had been seen by a seedsman who kept a shop in the town, and who knew
Churchill well, standing in the High Street talking to an unknown man he
had never seen before. After that, nobody appeared to have seen
Churchill until--just before 10:30, at which time the inn at Holt Stacey
closed--he had come into the inn and ordered a hot drink. Nobody was
with him then. He appeared, so the innkeeper said, to already have drunk
to excess, and this had surprised the innkeeper, who knew him to be a
temperate man, adding that that was the first time he had ever seen him
even partially intoxicated. Incidentally Churchill had mentioned that "a
gentleman had given him a lift from Newbury in his car." He had not said
who the gentleman was--if a stranger or somebody he knew, or where he
was going. Presumably the man in the car had branched off at Holt
Stacey--for he had not put up there for the night. Had he been going on
past Holt Manor he would, it was reasonable to suppose, have taken
Churchill all the way, and dropped him at the gate.

Soon after 10:30 Churchill had left the inn, saying that he was about to
walk home to Holt Manor, a distance of four miles. That was the last
time he was known to have been seen alive. It was snowing when he
set out.

Poor Dulcie was terribly cut up. I had always known her to be very
partial to the old gardener, who remembered her as a baby, but until
after his death I had not realized how deeply attached to him she really
had been. What most distressed me was that she blamed herself,
indirectly, for what had happened. Again and again did she declare to me
that, had she not given him leave to take the afternoon off the tragedy
would not have happened. In vain I tried to make her see the fallacy of
her argument--she would not listen to reason.

A fortnight went by, and nothing was discovered. The secret of the
murder remained even a greater mystery than the secret of the robbery.
True, I had my suspicions, but until I had some slight shreds of
evidence to go upon it would, I knew, be futile to make known those
suspicions. And it was because I suspected somebody of indirect, if not
direct, connivance at Churchill's murder, that I became more and more
distressed, indeed alarmed, at Dulcie's daily increasing affection for
the woman Stapleton. Their friendship was now firmly established--at any
rate, Dulcie's feeling of friendship for the widow. Whether the widow's
feeling of friendship for Dulcie was actual or only apparent was, I
thought, quite another matter.

"_Come at once. Urgent_:--_Jack_."

That telegram reached me on this afternoon, exactly two weeks after the
murder, two weeks that I had spent at Holt Manor with Dulcie, during
which time, I am bound to say, Aunt Hannah had revealed herself in quite
a new light, being friendly, even affectionate in the extreme.

"Don't go--oh! don't go, Mike!" Dulcie cried out, suddenly clutching my
arm, after reading the telegram which I had handed to her.

"But I must, darling," I exclaimed. "Jack wouldn't send me that wire if
the matter were not really urgent. It has most likely to do with the
robbery--I have told you that he is determined to find out who committed
it, with the help of that detective friend of his, George Preston. It
may even have to do with the other affair--or possibly with Jack being
kept confined in the house in Grafton Street."

"I don't care what it has to do with--don't go, dearest--please don't, I
ask you as a favour," and, bending over, she kissed me on the lips.

It was horribly hard to resist such an appeal, and yet I felt I should
be a cur if Jack really needed me--and obviously he did--and I failed to
go to him. And what would Dulcie think of me later if, through my giving
way to her entreaty, some serious harm should befall my friend? Much as
I loved her, I could not let her influence me in such a case; even if I
did, it might in the end make her despise me.

"I would do anything in the world for you, sweetheart," I said, kissing
her fondly. "You know that, as well as I do. I would grant you any
favour provided--"

"Provided what?" she asked quickly as I paused.

"Provided that my doing so could have no harmful result. Prevent my
going to Jack in such a crisis, and--"

I stopped abruptly. My tongue had, alas, outrun my discretion.

"Crisis? What crisis?" Dulcie burst forth, startled at my tone. "Oh,
Mike, you are keeping something from me, you are deceiving me--don't say
that you aren't, for I know you are!"

"Darling," I exclaimed, taking her in my arms, "I am not deceiving
you--indeed, indeed I am not. I may have been wrong in using the word
'crisis.' What I meant was that, knowing that Jack and a friend of his
are striving tooth and nail to track down the thieves who robbed this
house, and seeing that I have promised to help Jack to the best of my
ability, I feel that this urgent telegram of his means that something
has come to light, that he has heard something or discovered some clue
which makes it imperative that I should go to him at once. And I am
going--now."

Quickly I released her. Then, fearing that further delay--added,
possibly, to further persuasion on her part--might end by weakening my
determination, I gave her a final kiss, and hurried out of the room.

Again I glanced at the telegram--

"_Come at once. Urgent.--Jack._"

Then I crumpled the paper and tossed it into the fire.

Having arrived at Paddington I went straight to Jack Osborne's hotel.
He had left word that, upon my arrival, I should be told to go to a
house in Warwick Street, Regent Street, and there inquire for him.

It was George Preston's address. I hastened there in a taxi, and, as I
rang the bell, I heard a clock strike six. Preston himself admitted me.

"Mr. Osborne has not yet arrived," he said as, after a word of
explanation, we shook hands, "but I expect him any minute, and he is
expecting you. Will you come in and wait?"

As I had not previously been to Preston's house its appearance surprised
me. One does not associate a police detective, even an ex-detective,
with a taste in things artistic, but here on all sides was evidence of
refinement and a cultured mind--shelves loaded with carefully selected
books, volumes by classic authors; treatises on art; standard works by
deep thinkers of world-wide repute, while on the walls hung mezzotints I
knew to be extremely rare. In addition there were several beautiful
statues, cloisonne vases from Tokio and Osaka, antique furniture from
Naples and from Florence, also treasures from Burma, the West Indies,
and New Guinea.

The door opened, and the maid announced: "Baron Poppenheimer."

"Ah, my dear Baron," Preston exclaimed as he advanced to meet him, "this
is a real pleasure; I didn't expect you so soon, but, as you are here,
come and sit down," and he drew forward a chair. "But first let me
present to you Mr. Michael Berrington, a friend of our mutual friend
Jack Osborne's."

"Delighted to meet you--delighted, I am sure," Baron Poppenheimer said,
with a slight accent, extending two fingers--a form of handshake which I
particularly dislike. "Dreadfully cold again, is it not?--hein?
Dreadfully cold, I am sure."

His appearance rather amused me. His was a queer figure. He wore a
thick, dark blue box-cloth overcoat, double-breasted, with large pearl
buttons, and a wide collar of yellow fur, which came well down on the
shoulders; the fur cuffs matched it. His gloves were woolly ones,
lavender-coloured, and the black silk hat which he carried in his right
hand was burnished until it rivalled the shine of his patent boots--the
"uppers" being hidden by spats. He had curly, black hair; black, rather
bushy eyebrows; and a small imperial. While he carried a stout malacca
cane with a large gold head to it, and in his left eye was a gold-rimmed
monocle secured round his neck by a broad black ribbon.

We conversed for a little time, and from his talk I could see that he
was something of a character. He knew many of my friends, and, upon my
repeating my name to him, he seemed to know a good deal about me. I
expressed surprise at this, whereupon he looked up at Preston, who stood
immediately behind me, and observed drily:

"I believe I could tell Mr. Berrington almost as much about himself as I
was able to tell you, Preston; what do you think?"

"Baron Poppenheimer is an extraordinarily clever clairvoyant and
palmist, Mr. Berrington," Preston said. "I place such implicit
confidence in his forecasts that I persuade him, whenever I can, to help
me in my work. Yesterday he took it into his head to read my palms, and
he told me things about myself that staggered-me--I almost begin to
believe in black magic!"

I became greatly interested.

"I wish I could some day persuade the Baron to read my palms," I
exclaimed, "Palmistry has always rather appealed to me."

"So?" Baron Poppenheimer answered. "I will read your palms for you now,
if you will, I am sure."

He took my right hand, flattened it, palm upward, on his knee, studied
it closely for a moment or two, then, after a few moments' silence,
began to talk fluently and rapidly. The things he told me about myself,
things I had done, even things I had only thought, made me almost gape
with amazement. Then he took my left hand, examined both sides of it
closely through his monocle, and continued his disclosures. He told me
to within a day or two how long I had been engaged to be married, and
described Dulcie's appearance to the life; he even went so far as to
tell me exactly how she talked. For some moments I wondered if Preston
could have coached the Baron in my movements; then I remembered that the
Baron had told me things about myself of which Preston knew nothing.

"And that is all I have to tell you, my dear Mike," the "Baron" suddenly
exclaimed in quite a different voice. I sprang back in my chair as I
looked up sharply. Jack Osborne had pulled off his black, curly wig, and
sat laughing loudly. Preston too was considerably amused.

"Yes, George," Jack said at last, "that disguise will do; you certainly
are a marvel in the art of 'make-up.' If I can deceive Mike Berrington,
who is one of my oldest friends, I shall be able to hoodwink anybody.
Now you had better try your hand on Mike. What sort of person do you
propose to turn him into? I have told you that he is an excellent actor,
and can mimic voices to perfection."

Osborne then explained why he had telegraphed to me. Preston had made a
discovery--a rather important discovery. Exactly what it was they would
not tell me then, but Preston had suggested that on that very night the
three of us should visit Easterton's house in Cumberland Place, where
Gastrell's reception had taken place, wearing effectual disguises which
he would attend to, and see for ourselves what there was to be seen. It
was Osborne, I now learned for the first time, who had effected the
introduction between Hugesson Gastrell and "Lord Cranmere"--the actual
Lord Cranmere had been consulted by Jack on the subject of his being
impersonated, and when Jack had outlined to him his plan and told him
why the detective, Preston, wished to impersonate him, Lord Cranmere had
entered into the spirit of the thing and given his consent. He had,
indeed, expressed no little alarm when Jack had told him how the
mysterious, unseen individual at the house in Grafton Street had
cross-questioned him with regard to Eldon Hall, Cranmere's place in
Northumberland, the whereabout of the safe that Cranmere had bought ten
months previously, the likelihood of there being a priests' hiding-hole
at Eldon, and so on.

"The whole idea regarding to-night, and our plan of action, originates
with Preston," Jack said to me. "He believes--in fact, he is almost
sure--that Gastrell and his associates know nothing of him by repute as
a detective, also that they don't know him by sight, or by name either.
He says, however, that they believe they are now personally acquainted
with Lord Cranmere, upon whose property we think they have evil designs.
'Lord Cranmere' is now, in turn, going to introduce to Gastrell and his
associates two particular friends of his. Those friends will be 'Baron
Poppenheimer' and--who is Cranmere's other friend to be, George?" he
inquired, looking up at Preston.

"'Sir Aubrey Belston,'" Preston answered at once. "Mr. Berrington is not
at all unlike Sir Aubrey, in build as well as in feature."

"'Baron Poppenheimer' and 'Sir Aubrey Belston,'" Jack said, "who in
private life are Jack Osborne and Michael Berrington. And if George
disguises you and coaches you as well as he did me, I undertake to say
that nobody will suspect that you are not actually Sir Aubrey Belston."




CHAPTER XIV


IN THE MISTS

At a quarter to one in the morning Cranmere's big, grey, low-built car
slid noiselessly along Wigmore Street and drew up at the entrance to one
of the most imposing-looking houses in Cumberland Place.

The imposing footman got down and rang the bell--he pressed the button
four times in succession, as "Lord Cranmere" had told him to do. Almost
at once the door was opened, and from the car window we saw a tall man
in knee-breeches silhouetted, while a little way behind him stood
another man. "Lord Cranmere" stepped out of the car, and we followed
him--"Baron Poppenheimer" and "Sir Aubrey Belston." In point of fact,
the real Sir Aubrey Belston was at that moment somewhere in the Malay
States, making a tour of the world.

"Lord Cranmere" had told the chauffeur that he would not require him
again that night, and I had noticed the man touch his hat in the belief
that this actually was his employer who addressed him, for the real Earl
of Cranmere had lent us his car. I heard the car purr away in the
darkness, and an instant later the door of number 300 Cumberland Place
shut noiselessly behind us.

The footman in knee-breeches and powdered head, who had admitted us, led
us without a word across the large hall, turned into a long corridor
dimly-lit by tinted electric lamps, turned to the left, then to the
right, then showed us into a small, comfortably-furnished room in which
a fire burned cheerily, while in a corner a column printing machine
ticked out its eternal news from the ends of the earth. We waited
several minutes. Then the door opened and Hugesson Gastrell entered.

Like ourselves, he was in evening clothes. He advanced, shook hands
cordially with "Lord Cranmere," saying that he had received his
telephone message.

"These are my friends of whom I spoke," Cranmere said, "Baron
Poppenheimer and Sir Aubrey Belston."

"Delighted to meet you," Gastrell exclaimed. "Any friend of Cranmere's
is welcome here; one has, of course, to be careful whom one admits on
these occasions--isn't that so, Cranmere? Come upstairs and have
some supper."

We followed him, ascending to the first floor. In a large,
high-ceilinged, well-lit room an elaborate supper was spread. There were
seats for thirty or forty, but only ten or a dozen were occupied. A
strange atmosphere pervaded the place, an atmosphere of secrecy, of
mystery. As we entered, the people at supper, men and women, had glanced
up at us furtively, then continued their conversation. They talked more
or less under their breath.

Gastrell called for a bottle of "bubbly," and about half an hour later
we rose. The room was by this time deserted. Following Gastrell along a
narrow passage, we presently found ourselves in a room larger than the
one we had just left. Here between forty and fifty men and women sat at
several tables. At one _chemin-de-fer_ was in progress; at another
_petits chevaux_; at a third the game which of late years has become so
popular in certain circles--"Sandown Park." On all the tables money was
heaped up, and on all sides one heard the musical chink of gold and the
crackle of bank-notes. Nobody spoke much. Apparently all present were
too deeply engrossed to waste time in conversation.

As I glanced about me I noticed several people I knew intimately, and
four or five I knew only by sight, people well known in Society. I was
on the point of bowing to one woman I knew, who, looking up, had caught
my eye; just in time I remembered that she would not recognize me in my
disguise. Then a man nodded to me, and I nodded back. He looked rather
surprised at seeing me, I thought, and at once it flashed across me that
of course he was under the impression that I was Sir Aubrey Belston, and
probably he had heard that Sir Aubrey was travelling round the world.

Gastrell, after a few minutes' conversation, found us places at a table
where "Sandown Park" was being played. As I seated myself I found,
facing me, Jasmine Gastrell, and for some moments I felt uncomfortable.
I could feel her gaze upon my face as she scrutinized me closely, but
even she did not penetrate my disguise.

"Lord Cranmere" sat upon the opposite side of the table, "Baron
Poppenheimer" on my side, two seats from me. On my right was one of the
unintelligent-looking women I had met at Connie Stapleton's dinner party
at the Rook Hotel in Newbury; on my immediate left a man I did not know.
Connie Stapleton I had looked about for, but she was nowhere visible.

So this was one of the ways Gastrell amassed money--he ran a
gaming-house! I now began to see his object in cultivating the
acquaintance of people of rank and wealth; for I had long ago noticed
that Jasmine and Hugesson Gastrell never missed an opportunity of
becoming acquainted with men and women of position. Also I began to
grasp Preston's line of action. Disguised as the Earl of Cranmere, who
was known to be extremely rich, he had cleverly ingratiated himself with
the Gastrells and led them on to think him rather a fool who could
easily be gulled. Jack had more than once told me how artfully Preston
played his cards when on the track of people he suspected and wished to
entrap, so that I could well imagine Preston's leading the Gastrells on
to ensnare him--as they no doubt supposed they were doing. For that he
would not have been admitted to this gambling den--it evidently became
one at night--unless the Gastrells had believed they could trust him
and his friends implicitly, I felt certain.

My friends tell me that I am a rather good actor, and Preston's coaching
in Sir Aubrey Belston's mannerisms and ways of talking had given me a
measure of self-confidence. When, therefore--I had played for a quarter
of an hour and won a good deal--Jasmine Gastrell suddenly addressed me,
I did not feel disconcerted.

"I mean to follow your lead," she said. "You are so extraordinarily
lucky. How is it you manage to win every time?"

"Not every time," I corrected. "It's quite easy if you set about it in
the right way."

"I wish I knew the right way," she answered, fixing her eyes on me in
the way I knew so well. "Won't you tell me how you do it?"

"Different people must 'do it,' as you put it, in different ways," I
said. "Forgive my asking, but are you superstitious?"

She broke into rippling laughter.

"Superstitious? I?" she exclaimed. "Oh, that's the last thing my enemies
would accuse me of being!"

I paused, looking hard at her.

"And yet," I said seriously, "judging by your eyes, I should say that
you are remarkably psychic, and most people who are psychic are
superstitious up to a point."

I went on looking at her, staring right into her eyes, which she kept
set on mine. She did not in the least suspect my identity--I was now
positive of that. I had spoken all the time in an assumed voice.

"Yes," I said at last, impressively.

"Yes what?" she asked quickly; she was not smiling now. "Why do you say
'yes' like that? What does it mean?"

Apparently our conversation disturbed some of the players, so I said to
her seriously, indicating an alcove at the end of the room:

"Let us go over there. I should like to talk to you."

She made no demur, and presently we sat together in the alcove, partly
concealed by palms and other plants, a small table between us.

"Now tell me how you win, and how I am to win," she exclaimed, as soon
as we were seated. "I should dearly love to know."

I reflected, as I sat looking at her, that she was a consummate actress.
I could not doubt that she ran this establishment in connection with
Gastrell, yet here she was feigning deep anxiety to discover how she
could win.

"I don't know your name," I said at last, ignoring her inquiry, "but you
are one of the most amazing women, I would say one of the most amazing
human beings, I have ever met."

"How do you know that--I mean what makes you say it?" she asked quickly,
evidently disconcerted at my solemnity and at the impressive way
I spoke.

"Your aura betrays it," I answered in the same tone. "Every man and
woman is surrounded by an aura, but to less than one in ten thousand is
the human aura visible. It is visible to me. The human aura betrays, in
too many cases, what I would call its 'victim.' Your aura betrays you."

I leaned forward across the table until my face was close to hers. Then,
still looking straight into her eyes, I said, almost in a whisper:

"Shall I tell you what I see? Shall I tell you what your life has been?"

She turned suddenly pale. Then, struggling to regain her composure, she
said after a brief pause, but in a tone that lacked conviction:

"I don't believe a word you say. Who are you? Whom have I the pleasure
of speaking to?"

"Sir Aubrey Belston," I answered at once. "You may have heard of me.
Good God--the things I see!"

I pretended to give a little shudder. My acting must have been good, for
on the instant she turned almost livid. Again she made a terrific effort
to overcome the terror that I could see now possessed her.

"I _will_ tell you what I see!" I exclaimed, suddenly snatching the
wrist of her hand which lay upon the table, and holding it tightly.
Though almost completely concealed by the palms and plants, she strove
to shrink still further out of sight, as though the players, engrossed
in their games, would have spared time to notice her.

My eyes met hers yet again, but the expression in her eyes had now
completely changed. In place of the bold, impelling look I had always
seen there, was a fearful, hunted expression, as though she dreaded
what I was going to say.

"I see a room," I said in a low, intense tone, holding her wrist very
tightly still. "It is not a large room. It is a first-floor room, for I
see the exterior of the house and the two windows of the room. I see the
interior again. Several people are there--I cannot see them all clearly,
but two stand out distinctly. One is Gastrell, to whom I have this
evening been introduced; the other is you; ah, yes, I see you now more
clearly than before, and I see now another man--handsome, fair, about
twenty-eight or thirty--I can see his aura too--his aura within your
aura--he loves you desperately--and--ah, I see something lying on the
floor--a woman--she is dead--you--"

Her thin wrist suddenly turned cold; her eyes were slowly closing. Just
in time I sprang to my feet to save her from falling off her chair, for
she had fainted.

None of the players were aware of what had happened; all were too deeply
engrossed. Without attempting to restore my companion to
consciousness--for, in the face of what I had now learned practically
beyond doubt to be a fact, I had no wish to revive her--I left her lying
in her chair, stepped noiselessly along behind the mass of plants which
occupied one side of the room, emerged further away, and presently took
a vacant seat at a _chemin-de-fer_ table.

I glanced at my watch. It was nearly two o'clock. Thinking over what had
just happened, and wondering what my next move had better be, and what
Jack and Preston intended doing, I stared carelessly about the room.

At all the tables play was still in progress. At some complete silence
prevailed. From others there arose at intervals a buzz of conversation.
Behind some of the lucky players stood groups of interested watchers.
About the sideboard were clustered men and women refreshing themselves,
the majority smoking and laughing, though a few looked strangely solemn.
Among the latter I suddenly noticed a face I had seen before. It was the
demure, dark little woman who at Connie Stapleton's dinner party had all
the evening seemed so subdued. She was dressed quietly now, just as she
had been then, and she looked even more out of place in this crowd of
men and women gamblers, all of whom were exceedingly well-dressed, than
she had looked at that dinner party. "There is only one person I should
be more surprised at seeing here," I said mentally, "and that
is Dulcie."

The thought of her made me wonder what she would think if she could see
me at this moment, when suddenly my heart seemed to stop beating.

Seated at the table nearest me but one, a table partly surrounded by a
group of excited onlookers, was Connie Stapleton. And close beside her,
engrossed in the game, Dulcie Challoner herself!




CHAPTER XV


THE MODERN VICE

So staggered was I that for the moment I almost forgot my disguise, and
the _role_ I was playing, and was on the point of hurrying over to
Dulcie and asking her how she came to be there. That Mrs. Stapleton must
have brought her, of course I guessed.

Fortunately I restrained myself just in time. Dulcie, I saw to my
dismay, was not merely playing, but was deeply engrossed in the game.
"Sandown Park" was the game in progress at that table, a game which to
all intents is a series of horse-races, but whereas at a race-meeting
only half a dozen or so races are run in an afternoon, the players at
"Sandown Park" can back horses in half a dozen races in as many minutes.
Judging by the interest she evidently took in the game, Dulcie must, I
conjectured, have been playing for some time, for she appeared to be
quite _au fait_. Never had she mentioned this game to me, and never had
I known her to take interest in backing horses or in any form of
reckless speculation. Consequently I had reason to suppose that this was
the first time she had played, if not the first time she had seen or
heard of the game.

Did I dare approach her? Would my feelings get the better of me and lead
to my betraying who I was? Though I had not been identified by people
who knew me, would Dulcie's perception be keener and lead to her seeing
through my disguise? These and similar doubts and questions crowded my
brain as I stood there watching her from a distance, but in the end
indiscretion got the better of prudence, and I decided to join the men
and women grouped about the table at which she and her friend sat.

For fully ten minutes I stood there, and during that time I saw her win
seven times in succession. She seemed to play without judgment or
calculation, in fact, with absolute recklessness, and after winning
three "races" in succession she had increased her stake each time. In
the fourth "race" she had backed a horse for ten pounds at four to one,
and won. In the next race she had planked twenty sovereigns on an
outsider, and raked in over a hundred pounds. The next two races had
increased her pile by between three and four hundred pounds. I could see
her panting with excitement. Her lips were slightly parted. Her eyes
shone. Her whole soul seemed centred upon the game.

And then she began to lose.

At first slowly, then rapidly, her pile of gold and notes dwindled. Time
after time she backed the wrong "animal." Now only a few five- and
ten-pound notes and a little heap of sovereigns--twenty at
most--remained. Her face had turned gradually pale. Connie Stapleton
leant towards her and whispered in her ear. I saw Dulcie nod; then,
taking up all the money in front of her, she handed it to the man who
held the bank, and received a ticket in return.

The board with the graduated divisions and the names of the horses
marked upon them spun round once more. Dulcie's brows were contracted,
her face was drawn, her expression tense. Slowly the board now
revolved, slower still. It stopped. I saw her give a little start, and
distinctly heard the gasp which escaped her.

She had lost everything.

Connie Stapleton's hand closed over hers, as though to reassure her.
Again the widow spoke into her ear. A moment later I saw a roll of notes
pushed towards Dulcie. Eagerly she grabbed them.

This was terrible. I realized at once what was happening. The widow was
lending her money. I wondered if the money she had already lost had been
lent to her by her friend. Instantly it dawned upon me that it must have
been, unless, indeed, Dulcie had, before I arrived, been extraordinarily
lucky, for I knew that she had not money enough of her own to gamble
with for such high stakes. She was playing again now--and losing. Once
or twice she won, but after each winner came several losers. I was
gradually getting fascinated. Again the widow lent her money, and again
she lost it all.

At last they rose. Never, as long as I live, shall I forget the
expression that was on my darling's face as, with the widow's arm linked
within her own, she made her way towards the door.

I followed them to the supper room. They stopped, and, standing at one
of the tables, Mrs. Stapleton filled two glasses with champagne. She
gave Dulcie one, and herself emptied the other. She filled her own again
and once more emptied it. Dulcie only half emptied her glass, then
set it down.

Out of the room they went. While they put on their wraps I went in
search of my hat. A few minutes later Mrs. Stapleton and Dulcie were
entering a car which I at once recognized as Connie Stapleton's. As the
car started I saw a taxi approaching, and hailed it.

"Follow that car," I said to the driver. "Keep it in sight, and, when
you see it stop, stop forty or fifty yards behind it."

Right up into Hampstead the grey car sped. It slackened speed near
Southend Road, eventually pulling up at a house in Willow Road. Leaning
forward, I rubbed the frosted glass in the front of my taxi, and peered
out. I saw Mrs. Stapleton alight first; then she turned and helped
Dulcie to get out. Both entered the house. The door closed quietly, and
the car rolled away.

For some minutes I waited. Then I told my driver to pass slowly by the
house and make a note of the number. The number was "460."

That, at any rate, was satisfactory. I had discovered what was,
presumably, Mrs. Stapleton's London address. Only then did I begin to
wonder what Osborne and Preston would think when they found that I had
gone. So engrossed had I become in Dulcie's movements that for the time
all thought of my two companions had passed out of my mind. I thought of
returning to the house in Cumberland Place; then, deciding that it was
too late, I told the driver to go direct to my flat in South
Molton Street.

A letter was lying on the table in my sitting-room. I seemed to
recognize the writing, and yet--

I tore open the envelope and pulled out the letter. To my surprise it
was from Dick, who was now back at Eton. "My dear Mike," it ran. "I have
something very important to say to you, and I want to say it at once.
But I don't want to write it. Can you come here to see me to-morrow as
soon as possible, or can you get leave for me to come to London to see
you? I don't want to go home, because if I did father and Aunt Hannah
and Dulcie would ask questions, and what I want to say to you is _quite
private_. Will you telegraph to me as soon as you get this to say what I
can do and where I can see you at once?

"Your affectionate brother-in-law-to-be,

"DICK."

I read the letter through again; then refolded it and put it in a
drawer. The letter, I saw by the postmark, had arrived by the last post.

What could the boy want to see me about? What could he have to say to me
that he wished to keep secret from his family? I could not imagine.
Anyway, I would, I decided, gratify him--I was very fond of Dick. Then
and there I wrote out a telegram to be sent off early in the morning,
telling him that I would come down in the afternoon; I had decided to
try to see something of Dulcie during the morning, also to telephone to
Holt to inquire for her, though without betraying to Sir Roland or Aunt
Hannah that I knew anything of her movements during the previous night.

But Sir Roland forestalled me. Shortly after eight o'clock I was
awakened by the telephone at my bedside ringing loudly. Still half
asleep, I grabbed the receiver and glued it to my ear.

"Had I seen anything of Dulcie? Did I know where she was and why she had
not returned?"

The speaker was Sir Roland, and he spoke from Holt Manor.

"Why, isn't she at home?" I asked, controlling my voice.

"If she were here I shouldn't ask where she is," Sir Roland answered
quite sharply. "Mrs. Stapleton called yesterday afternoon to ask if
Dulcie might dine with her in town and go to the theatre. Of course I
raised no objection"--Sir Roland in no way shared my suspicion
concerning Mrs. Stapleton; on the contrary, she attracted him and he
liked her, though Aunt Hannah did not--"and Dulcie dressed and went off
at about five o'clock. They were to go to 'The Rook,' Mrs. Stapleton
said, where she would dress, and then they would motor to London. Mrs.
Stapleton assured me that she would bring Dulcie back here by about
midnight or one o'clock, and Dulcie took with her the key of the back
door, so that nobody need wait up for her--she told her maid to go to
bed. Her maid has just come to tell me that when she went to awaken
Dulcie, she found that she had not returned. I have telephoned to 'The
Rook,' and they tell me there that Mrs. Stapleton has not been back to
the hotel since yesterday soon after lunch. So I suppose that after
leaving here she decided to motor straight to town, and dress there. I
suppose she has some _pied-a-terre_ in London, though she has never
told me so."

"And you say that Dulcie has the door key with her," I said. "Do you
think it was wise to give it to her?"

"Why in the world not? She has often taken it before. But tell me, have
you seen anything of Dulcie?"

I didn't like telling an untruth, but, questioned in that point-blank
way, I had to prevaricate; otherwise I should have been forced to say
all I knew.

"She has not been to see me," I answered. "Perhaps Mrs. Stapleton's car
broke down and they have been obliged to seek refuge at some wayside
inn. I wouldn't be anxious, Sir Roland," I added, knowing how little it
needed to make him anxious about Dulcie. "You will probably get a
telegram from one of them presently."

We exchanged a few more remarks, and then Sir Roland exclaimed suddenly:

"Hold the line a moment. Hannah wants to speak to you."

Aunt Hannah, who, whatever faults she possessed, rarely lost her head,
spoke sensibly and incisively. She didn't like this affair at all, she
said, and intended to speak very seriously to Dulcie immediately upon
her return. Also she was determined to put an end to this strong
friendship between her niece and Mrs. Stapleton. On Dulcie's side, she
said, it was nothing less than an absurd infatuation. She would not have
minded her being infatuated about some women, but she had come
thoroughly to mistrust Mrs. Stapleton.

I asked her to telephone or telegraph to me the moment Dulcie got home,
and said that if I saw Dulcie in town or heard anything of her during
the morning I would at once ring up Holt Manor. With that we rang off.

"Can I see Mrs. Stapleton?" I inquired, as the door of the house in
Willow Road was opened by a maid with rather curious eyes; I had come
there straight from my flat, no longer wearing my disguise, and it was
nearly eleven o'clock. Just then I had an inspiration, and I added
quickly, before she had time to answer, "or Mr. Hugesson Gastrell?"

An arrow shot at random, it proved a lucky shot, for the maid answered
at once:

"Mrs. Stapleton isn't dressed yet, sir; but Mr. Gastrell can see you, I
expect. What name shall I say?"

I was shown into a small morning room, and there I waited for, I
suppose, five minutes. At last I heard footsteps approaching, and in a
moment Gastrell entered.

"Dear me, this is a surprise," he exclaimed cordially, extending his
hand. "I didn't know I had given you this address. Well, and what can I
do for you?"

His tone, as he said this, was rather that of a patron addressing an
inferior, but I pretended not to notice it, and, drawing upon my
imagination, answered:

"I don't think you did give me this address; it was somebody else--I
forget who--who mentioned it to me the other day in course of
conversation. Really I have come to see Mrs. Stapleton and inquire for
Miss Challoner."

"Miss Challoner? Do you mean Miss Dulcie Challoner, Sir Roland's
daughter?"

"Yes."

An extremely puzzled look came into his eyes, though this he was
probably not aware of.

"But what makes you think Miss Challoner is here?" he inquired quickly.

"She spent the night here with Mrs. Stapleton."

He looked still more puzzled.

"Did she really?" he answered in a tone of surprise which obviously was
feigned.

"Yes. Didn't you know?"

"This is the first I have heard of it, but I dare say you are right.
Mrs. Stapleton has rooms in this house--it's a little private
establishment of mine--but beyond that I know little of her movements.
I'll go and inquire if you'll wait a moment."

"Clever scoundrel!" I said aloud when he had left the room and shut the
door. "Rooms here," "knows little of her movements," "first he has heard
of it." But I am going to bowl you out in the end, my friend, I ended
mentally as I seated myself and picked up one of the morning papers
which lay upon the table. It was the _Morning Post_. I noticed that
several little bits had been cut out of the front page--presumably
advertisements.

I had scanned one or two pages and was reading a leading article when
Gastrell returned.

"You are quite right," he said, offering me his cigarette case. "Miss
Challoner is here. After supper last night at the Carlton with Mrs.
Stapleton she didn't feel very well, so Mrs. Stapleton persuaded her to
come back and sleep here instead of motoring back to Newbury. She told
her maid to telegraph early this morning to Sir Roland Challoner, in
case he should feel anxious at Miss Challoner's not returning last
night, but the maid stupidly forgot to. She is sending a telegram now.
Miss Challoner is quite all right this morning, and will be down
presently, but I am afraid you won't be able to see Mrs. Stapleton, as
she isn't up yet."

I thanked him for finding out, thinking, as I did so, that certainly he
was one of the most plausible liars I had ever come across; and then for
a few minutes we conversed on general topics.

"You don't remember who it was told you my address?" he presently asked
carelessly, flicking his cigarette ash into the grate.

"I am sorry, I don't," I answered, pretending to think. "It was some
days ago that somebody or other told me you lived here, or rather that
you had an address here."

"Oh, indeed. It's odd how people talk. By the way, how did you come to
know that Mrs. Stapleton and Miss Challoner were here?"

His question was interrupted by Dulcie's entering, wrapped in a great
fur coat. There were dark marks under her eyes that I had never seen
there before, but she seemed in quite good spirits as she came across
the room and greeted me.

"How in the world did you find out I was here!" she exclaimed. "It is
most astonishing. Did you know that Connie had rooms here? I didn't,
until last night. It was so good of her to put me up. I can't think what
it was upset me so last night, but I am quite all right this morning.
Connie has just telegraphed to father to explain my absence--you know
how little it takes to worry him. I've got my evening dress on under
this coat that Connie's lent me. She wanted to lend me one of her day
dresses, but not one of them comes near fitting me."

I gasped. I couldn't answer. It was bad enough to find people like
Gastrell and Jasmine Gastrell and Connie Stapleton perjuring themselves
in the calmest way imaginable; but that Dulcie, whom I had until now
implicitly believed to be everything that was good should thus look me
in the eyes and lie to me--with as much self-assurance as though she had
been accustomed to practising deception all her life.

A kind of haze seemed to rise before my eyes. My brain throbbed. All the
blood seemed suddenly to be going out of my heart. Mechanically putting
out an arm, I supported myself against the mantelpiece.

"Mike! Mike! What is the matter? Are you ill? do you feel faint?"

Her voice sounded a long, long way off. I heard her words as one hears
words in a dream. My mouth had turned suddenly dry. I tried to speak,
but could not.

"Here, Berrington, drink this and you'll feel better."

These were the next words I remember hearing. I was lying back on the
settee, and Gastrell was holding a tumbler to my lips. It contained
brandy slightly diluted. I drank a lot of it, and it revived me to
some extent.

Still uncertain if I were sleeping or awake, I passed out through the
hall, slightly supported by Dulcie, and clambered after her into the
taxi which awaited us outside.

"Go to Paddington," I heard her say to the driver, as she pulled the
door to. No servant had come out of the house, and Gastrell had
disappeared while we were still inside the hall.




CHAPTER XVI


SECRETS OF DUSKY FOWL

To this day that drive to Paddington recalls to mind a nightmare. The
entire confidence I had placed in Dulcie was shattered. Had anybody told
me it was possible she could deceive me as she had done I should, I
know, have insulted him--so infuriated should I have felt at the bare
thought. And yet she clearly had deceived me, deceived me most horribly,
inasmuch as she had done it in such cold blood and obviously with
premeditation. Her eyes, which had always looked at me, as I thought, so
truthfully, had gazed into mine that morning with the utmost coolness
and self-possession while she deliberately lied to me. Dulcie a liar!
The words kept stamping themselves into my brain until my head throbbed
and seemed on the point of bursting. As the car sped along through the
busy streets I saw nothing, heard nothing. The remarks she made to me
seemed to reach my brain against my will. I answered them mechanically,
in, for the most part, monosyllables.

What did it all mean? How could she continue to address me as though
nothing in the least unusual had occurred? Did she notice nothing in my
manner that appeared to be unusual? True, she addressed to me no term of
endearment, which was singular; but so engrossed was I in my
introspection and in my own misery that I scarcely noticed this.
Indeed, had she spoken to me fondly, her doing so just then would but
have increased the feeling of bitterness which obsessed me.

Several times during that drive I had been on the point of telling her
all I knew, all I had seen and heard: the suspicions I entertained
regarding her friend Connie--her abominable friend as she now seemed to
me to be; the grave suspicions I entertained also regarding Gastrell,
with whom she seemed to be on good terms, to say the least--these,
indeed, were more than suspicions. But at the crucial moment my courage
had failed me. How could I say all this, or even hint at it, in the face
of all I now knew concerning Dulcie herself, Dulcie who had been so much
to me, who was so much to me still though I tried hard to persuade
myself that everything between us must now be considered at an end?

I saw her off at Paddington. Mechanically I kissed her; why I did I
cannot say, for I felt no desire to. It was, I suppose, that
instinctively I realized that if I failed to greet her then in the way
she would expect me to she would suspect that I knew something. She had
asked me during our drive through the streets of London who had told me
where to find her; but what I answered I cannot recollect. I made, I
believe, some random reply which apparently satisfied her.

For two hours I lay upon my bed in my flat in South Molton Street,
tossing restlessly, my mind distraught, my brain on fire. Never before
had I been in love, and perhaps for that reason I felt this cruel
blow--my disillusionment--the more severely. Once or twice my man,
Simon, knocked, then tried the door and found it locked, then called out
to ask if anything were amiss with me. I scarcely heard him, and did
not answer. I wanted to be left alone, left in complete solitude to
suffer my deep misery unseen and unheard.

I suppose I must have slept at last--in bed at three and up at eight, my
night had been a short one--for when presently I opened my eyes I saw
that the time was half-past two. Then the thought flashed in upon me
that in my telegram I had promised to go to Eton to see Dick by the
train leaving Paddington at three. I had barely time to catch it. A
thorough wash restored me to some extent to my normal senses, and at
Paddington I bought a sandwich which served that day instead of lunch.

Once or twice before I had been down to Eton to see Dick, though on
those occasions I had been accompanied by Sir Roland. I had little
difficulty now in obtaining leave to take him out to tea. He wanted to
speak to me "quite privately," he said as we walked arm in arm up the
main street, so I decided to take him to the "White Hart," and there I
ordered tea in a private room.

"Now, Mike," he said in a confidential tone, when at last we were alone,
"this is what I want to draw your attention to," and, as he spoke, he
produced a rather dirty envelope from his trousers pocket, opened it and
carefully shook out on to the table several newspaper cuttings, each
three or four lines in length.

"What on earth are those about, old boy?" I asked, surprised. "Newspaper
advertisements, aren't they?"

"Yes, out of the _Morning Post_, all on the front page. If you will wait
a minute I will put them all in order--the date of each is written on
the back--and then _you_ will see if things strike _you_ in the way
they have struck me."

These were the cuttings:

     "R.P, bjptnbblx. wamii. xvzzjv. okk.
     zxxp.--DUSKY FOWL."

     "Rlxt. ex. lnvrb. 4. zcokk. zbpl. qc.
     Ptfrd. Avnsp. Hvfbl. Ucaqkoggwx.--DUSKY
     FOWL."

     "Plt. ecii. pv. oa. t1vp. uysaa. djt. xru.
     przvf. 4.--DUSKY FOWL."

     "Nvnntltmms. Pvvvdnzzpn. ycyswsa.
     Bpix. uyyuqecgsqa. X. W. ljfh. sc.
     jvtzfhdvb.--DUSKY FOWL."

"I can't make head or tail of them," I said when I had looked carefully
at each, and endeavoured to unravel its secret, for obviously it must
possess some secret meaning. "What do you make of them, Dick--anything?"

"Yes. Look, and I will show you," he answered, going to the
writing-table and bringing over pen, ink and paper. "I have always been
fond of discovering, or trying to discover, the meanings of these queer
cypher messages you see sometimes in some newspapers, and I have become
rather good at it--I have a book that explains the way cyphers are
usually constructed. I have found out a good many at one time and
another, but this one took me rather a long time to disentangle. I can
tell you, Mike, that when I found it concerned you I felt
frightfully excited."

"Concerned me!" I exclaimed. "Oh, nonsense. What is it all about?"

"Follow me carefully, and I'll show you. I guessed from the first that
it must be one of those cyphers that start their alphabet with some
letter other than A, but this one has turned out to be what my book
calls a 'complex alphabet' cypher. I tried and tried, all sorts of
ways--I began the alphabet by calling 'b' 'a'; then by calling 'c' 'a';
then by calling 'd' 'a,' and so on all the way through, but that was no
good. Then I tried the alphabet backwards, calling 'z' 'a'; then 'y'
'a'; right back to 'a,' but that wasn't it either. Then I tried one or
two other ways, and at last I started skipping the letters first
backwards, and then forwards. Doing it forwards, when I got to 'l' I
found I had got something. I called 'l' 'a'; 'n' 'b'; 'p' 'c'; and so
on, and made out _bjptnbblx_, the first word in the first cypher, to be
the word 'improving,' and the two letters before it in capitals 'R.P.'
to be really 'D.C.' The next cypher word, _wamii_, stumped me, as the
code didn't make it sense; then it occurred to me to start the alphabet
with 'm' instead of 'l,' skipping every alternate letter as before, and
I made out _wamii_ to mean 'shall.' The next cypher word, _xvzzjv_, I
couldn't get sense out of by starting the alphabet with either 'l' or
'm,' so I tried the next letter, 'n,' skipping alternate letters once
more, and that gave me the word 'settle.' I knew then that I had got the
key, and I soon had the whole sentence. It ran as follows:

"_D.C. improving shall settle all soon.--Dusky Fowl._"

"Still, I wasn't much the wiser, and it never for a moment occurred to
me that D.C. stood for Dulcie Challoner--"

"Good heavens, Dick!" I cried, "you don't mean to tell me that
Dulcie--"

"Do be patient, brother-in-law, and let me go through the whole thing
before you interrupt with your ejaculations," Dick said calmly. "Well,
four days went by, and then in the _Morning Post_ of February 7th the
second advertisement appeared:

     "Rlxt. ex. sroehnel. 28. Zcokk. zbpl. qc.
     Ptfrd. Avnsp. Hvfbl. Ucaqkoggwx.--DUSKY
     FOWL."

"The code was the same as the first, and I deciphered it quite easily.
Here it is," and he read from a bit of paper he held in his hand:

"_Date is February 28. Shall stay at Mount Royal Hotel,
Bedlington.--Dusky Fowl_."

There was nothing more after that until February 12th, when the third
advertisement appeared, same code,--here it is deciphered:

"_Car will be at Clun Cross two day February 28.--Dusky Fowl_."

"That 'Dusky Fowl' bothered me a lot. I couldn't think what it meant.
Several times I had gone through the names of all the 'dusky birds'
I could think of--blackbird, rook, crow, raven, and so on, but
nothing struck me, nothing seemed to make sense. Then the next
day--yesterday--an advertisement in the same code appeared which
startled me a lot because your name and Mr. Osborne's were in it, and it
didn't take me long then to get at the meaning of 'Dusky Fowl.' Here is
the advertisement from yesterday's _Morning Post_, and directly I had
read it I wrote that letter asking you to come to see me at once, or to
let me come to you."

He read out:

"_Osborne and Berrington suspect. Take precautions. D.C. with me
Hampstead.--Dusky Fowl_"

"'Dusky Fowl' evidently stands for 'rook,' and 'rook' for 'Rook Hotel,'
and 'Rook Hotel' for 'Mrs. Stapleton.' And that being the case, who else
can 'D.C.' stand for but 'Dulcie Challoner'? It's as plain as a
pike-staff."

"By Jove, Dick," I said after a few moments' pause, "I believe you are
right!"

"I am sure I am," he answered with complete self-assurance.

This clearly was a most important discovery. I decided to take the
cuttings and their solutions to Osborne the moment I got back to town,
and I intended to go back directly after delivering Dick safely back at
his school.

"Really," I exclaimed, feeling now almost as excited as the boy, "you
are pretty clever, old chap, to have found out all that. I wonder,
though, why Mrs. Stapleton doesn't telegraph or write to the man or
people these messages are intended for. It would be much simpler."

"It wouldn't be safe, Mike. I read in a book once that people of that
sort, the kind of people Mr. Osborne always speaks of as 'scoundrels,'
nearly always communicate in some sort of cypher, and generally by
advertising, because letters are so dangerous--they may miscarry, or be
stopped, or traced, and then they might get used as evidence against the
people who wrote them. By communicating in cypher and through a
newspaper of course no risk of any sort is run."

"Except when the cyphers get deciphered," I said, "as you have
deciphered these."

"Oh, but then people seldom waste time the way I do, trying to find
these things out; when they do it's generally a fluke if they come
across the key. It took me hours to disentangle the first of those
advertisements--the rest came easy enough."

All this conversation had distracted my mind a good deal, and I began to
feel better. For several minutes I was silent, wrapped in thought, and
Dick had tact enough not to interrupt me. I was mentally debating if
Dick might not, in more ways than one, prove a useful associate with
Osborne, Preston and myself in our task of unveiling the gang of clever
rogues and getting them convicted. One thing, which had struck me at
once, but that I had not told Dick, for fear of exciting him too much,
was that Bedlington was the large town nearest to Eldon Hall, the Earl
of Cranmere's seat, the place the mysterious, unseen man in the house in
Grafton Street had asked Jack Osborne about while he lay bound upon the
bed; also that February 28th was the date when Cranmere's eldest son
would come of age, on which day a week's festivities at Eldon would
begin--and festivities at Eldon were events to be remembered, I had been
told. What most occupied my thoughts, however, was the question I had
asked myself--should I make a confidant of little Dick and tell him how
things now stood between Dulcie and myself?

"Dick, old boy," I said, at last, "I wonder if I can treat you as I
would a grown man--as I would treat some grown men, I should say."

"I dare say you could, brother-in-law," he answered. "Why don't you
try?"

"Supposing that you were not to become my brother-in-law, as you seem so
fond of calling me, would you be sorry?"

"I jolly well think I should!" he replied, looking up sharply. "But what
makes you say a thing like that? It's all rot, isn't it?"

He seemed, as he looked at me with his big brown eyes which were so like
Dulcie's, to be trying to discover if I spoke in jest or partly
in earnest.

"You are going to marry Dulcie, aren't you? You're not going to break it
off? You haven't had a row or anything of that kind"

"No, not exactly a row," I said, staring into his nice frank face.

"Then why do you talk about not becoming my brother-in-law? If you don't
marry Dulcie you'll jolly nearly kill her. You don't know how fearfully
fond of you she is. You can't know, or you wouldn't talk about not
marrying her."

"I haven't talked about not marrying her," I answered hurriedly. "Tell
me, Dick, is that true--what you say about her being so awfully fond
of me?"

"I shouldn't say it if it wasn't true," he said with a touch of pride.
"But what did you mean when you said you wondered if you could treat me
as if I were a man?"

I put my arm round the lad, as he stood at the table, and drew him close
to me.

"Dick, old boy," I said with a catch in my voice, "I am very unhappy,
and I believe Dulcie is too, and I believe it is possible you may be
able to put things right if you set about it in the right way. But
first, tell me--you have talked to Mrs. Stapleton; do you like her?"

"I have never liked her from the first time she talked to me," he
answered without an instant's hesitation. "And I don't like her any the
better since I have heard you and Mr. Osborne talking about her, and
since I spotted her in that advertisement yesterday."

"Well, Dick," I went on, "Mrs. Stapleton and Dulcie are now tremendous
friends, and I believe that Mrs. Stapleton is trying to make Dulcie
dislike me; I believe she says things about me to Dulcie that are
untrue, and I think that Dulcie believes some of the things she
is told."

"What a beastly shame! But, oh no, Mike, Dulcie wouldn't believe
anything about you that was nasty--my word, I'd like to see anyone say
nasty things to her about you!"

"I am glad you think that, but still--anyway, certain things have
happened which I can't explain to you, and I am pretty sure Dulcie likes
me less than she did. I want you to try to find that out, and to tell
me. Will you try to if I can manage to get you a week-end at Holt?"

"Will I? You try me, Mike. And I won't only try to find out--I shall
find out."

It was six o'clock when I arrived back at Eton with Dick. Word was sent
to me that the headmaster would like to speak to me before I left. He
came into the room a few minutes afterwards, told Dick to go away and
return in ten minutes, then shut the door and came over to me. He looked
extremely grave.

"Half an hour ago I received this telegram," he said, pulling one out of
his pocket and handing it to me. "As I know you to be an intimate friend
of Sir Roland's, you may like to read it before I say anything to Dick."

I unfolded the telegram. It had been handed in at Newbury at five
o'clock, and ran:

"My daughter suddenly taken seriously ill. Dick must return at once. My
butler will await him under the clock on Paddington departure platform
at 7:15, and bring him down here. Please see that Dick is under clock at
7:15 this evening without fail.--CHALLONER."

I read the telegram twice, and even then I seemed unable to grasp its
full significance. Dulcie seriously ill! Good God, what had happened to
her--when we had parted on Paddington platform only a few hours before
she had appeared to be in perfect health. Had this sudden attack,
whatever it might be, any connection with Mrs. Stapleton, or with that
hateful affair that I had witnessed the night before--my darling Dulcie
gambling recklessly and losing, and then borrowing--from a woman I now
fully believed to be an adventuress--money to go on gambling with? Was
it even possible that, beside herself with dismay at the large amount of
money she now owed Mrs. Stapleton, she had in a sudden moment of madness
attempted to take--

I almost cried out as I banished from my brain the hideous thought. Oh,
God, anything rather than that! I must get further news, and without a
moment's loss of time. I must telegraph or telephone to Holt.

The headmaster's calm voice recalled me to my senses.

"It is indeed terrible news," he said sympathetically, struck, no doubt,
at the grief which the news had stamped upon my face. "But it may, after
all, be less serious than Sir Roland thinks. I was about to suggest, Mr.
Berrington," he went on, pulling out his watch, "that as you are, I take
it, returning to London by the 6:25, you might take Dick up with you and
place him in charge of Sir Roland's butler who will be awaiting him at a
quarter past seven under the clock on Paddington platform. If you can be
so very kind as to do this it will obviate the necessity of my sending
someone to London with him. I have given an order for such things as he
way require to be packed, and they should be ready by now. We must
break the news very gently to the boy, for I know that he is devoted to
his sister, so for the boy's sake, Mr. Berrington, try to bear up. I
know, of course, the reason of your deep grief, for Dick has told me
that you are engaged to be married to his sister."

Hardly knowing what I said, I agreed to do as he suggested, and see Dick
safely to Paddington. How we broke the news to him, and how he received
it when we did break it, I hardly recollect. All I remember distinctly
is standing in a telephone call office in Eton town, and endeavouring to
get through to Holt Manor. Not until it was nearly time for the London
train from Windsor to start, did the telephone exchange inform me they
had just ascertained that the line to Holt Manor was out of order, and
that they could not get through.

Anathematizing the telephone and all that had to do with it, I hurried
out to the taxi in which Dick sat awaiting me.

All the way from Windsor to London we exchanged hardly a word. Dick, I
knew, was terribly upset at the news, for his devotion to his sister was
as well known to me as it was to his father and to Aunt Hannah. But he
was a plucky little chap, and tried hard not to show how deeply the news
had affected him. For my part my brain was in a tumult. To think that I
should have parted from her that morning with feelings of resentment in
my heart, and that now she lay possibly at death's door. Again and again
I cursed myself for my irritability, my suspicions. Were they, after
all, unjust suspicions? Might Dulcie not have excellent reasons to give
for all that had occurred the night before? Might she not have been
duped, and taken to that house under wholly false pretences? An uncle of
hers believed to be dead, a brother of Sir Roland's, had, I knew, been
a confirmed gambler. There was much in heredity, I reflected, in spite
of modern theories to the contrary. Was it not within the bounds of
possibility that Dulcie, taken to that gambling den by her infamous
companion, and encouraged by her to play, might suddenly have felt
within her the irresistible craving that no man or woman born a gambler
has yet been able to overcome? And in any case, what right had I had
metaphorically to sit in judgment upon her and jump to conclusions which
might be wholly erroneous?

The train travelled at express speed through Slough, Didcot, and other
small stations. It was within a mile of London, when my thoughts
suddenly drifted. Why had Sir Roland not sent James direct to Windsor to
meet Dick, instead of wasting time by sending him all the way to London?
But perhaps James had been in town that day--he came up sometimes--and
Sir Roland had wired to him there. Again, why had he not sent the car to
Eton to fetch Dick away? That would have been the quicker plan; ah, of
course he would have done that had it been possible, but probably the
car had been sent into Newbury to fetch the doctor. That, indeed, was
probably what had happened, for the telegram had been handed it at
Newbury instead of at Holt Stacey. I knew that Sir Roland's chauffeur
had a poor memory--it was well known to be his chief fault; probably he
had shot through Holt Stacey, forgetting all about the telegram he had
been told to send off there, and, upon his arrival in Newbury,
remembered it and at once despatched it. Sir Roland had, I knew, a
rooted dislike to telephoning telegraphic messages direct to the post
office, and I had never yet known him dictate a telegram through his
telephone. Oh, how provoking, I said again, mentally, as I thought of
the telephone, that the instrument should have got out of order on this
day of all days--the one day when I had wanted so urgently to use it!

Now the train was slowing down. It was rattling over the points as it
passed into the station. Looking out of the window I could see the clock
on the departure platform. A few people were strolling near it, but
nobody was under it--at least no man. I could see a woman standing under
it, apparently a young woman.

Dick's luggage consisted of a suit-case which we had taken into the
carriage with us, and this I now carried for him as we descended into
the sub-way. The clock on the departure platform is only a few yards
from the exit of the sub-way, and, as we came out, the woman under the
clock was not looking in our direction. Somehow her profile seemed
familiar, and--

I stopped abruptly, and, catching Dick by the arm, pulled him quickly
behind a pile of luggage on a truck. An amazing thought had flashed into
my brain. As quickly as I could I gathered my scattered wits:

"Dick," I said after a few moments' reflection, trying to keep my brain
cool, "I believe--I have an idea all isn't right. There is no sign of
James, though our train was some minutes late and it is now twenty past
seven--James was to be here at a quarter past, according to that
telegram. But that woman waiting there--I know her by sight though I
have never spoken to her. She might remember me by sight, so I don't
want her to see me. Now look here, I want you to do this. Take hold of
your suit-case, and, as soon as that woman's back is turned, walk up and
stand under the clock, near her, as though you were awaiting someone.
Don't look at her or speak to her. I believe this is some trick. I don't
believe that telegram was sent by your father at all. I don't believe
Dulcie is ill. I think that woman is waiting for you, and that when you
have been there a few moments she will speak to you--probably ask you if
you are Master Challoner, and then tell you that she has been sent
instead of James to meet you, and ask you to go with her. If she does
that, don't look in the least surprised, answer her quite naturally--you
can inquire, if you like, how Dulcie is, though I shall not be a bit
surprised if we find her at home perfectly well--and if she asks you to
go with her, go. Don't be at all frightened, old chap; I shall follow,
and be near you all the time, whatever happens. And look here, if I have
guessed aright, and she does say that she has been asked to meet you and
tells you to come along with her, just put your hand behind you for an
instant, as you are walking away, and then I shall know."

"Oh, Mike, if Dulcie isn't ill, if after all nothing has happened to
her--"

His feelings overcame him, and he could not say more.

I moved a little to one side of the pile of trunks, and peered out.

"Now, Dick--now!" I exclaimed, as I saw the woman turn her back to us.

Dick marched up to her, carrying his suit-case, and waited under the
clock, just as I had told him to. He had not been there ten seconds when
I saw the woman step up to him and speak to him.

They exchanged one or two remarks, then, turning, walked away together.
And, as they walked, Dick's hand went up his back and he scratched an
imaginary flea.

Instantly I began to walk slowly after them. Dick was being taken away
by the dark, demure, quietly-dressed little woman I had seen at Connie
Stapleton's dinner party, and, only the night before, standing among the
onlookers in Gastrell's house in Cumberland Place.




CHAPTER XVII


IS SUSPICIOUS

They walked leisurely along the platform, Dick still carrying his
suit-case, and at the end of it passed down the sloping sub-way which
leads to the Metropolitan Railway. For a moment they were out of sight,
but directly I turned the corner I saw them again; they walked slower
now, Dick evidently finding his burden rather heavy. At the pigeon-hole
of the booking-office a queue of a dozen or so were waiting to buy
tickets. The woman and Dick did not stop, however. I saw them pass by
the queue, and then I saw the woman hold out tickets to the collector to
be clipped, and as I took my place at the back end of the queue she and
Dick passed on to the Praed Street platform.

To what station should I book? I had no idea where they were going, so
decided to go to High Street, Kensington, and pay the difference if I
had to follow them further. There were still six people in front of me,
when I heard the train coming in.

"Hurry up in front!" I called out in a fever of excitement, dreading
that I might not get a ticket in time.

"All right, my man--don't shove!" the man immediately before me
exclaimed angrily, pushing back against me. "This ain't the only train,
you know; if you miss this you can catch the next!"

I believe he deliberately took a long time getting out his money.
Anyway, before I had bought my ticket the train had started. A moment
later I stood upon the platform, watching, in a frenzy of despair, the
red tail-light of the train containing Dick and the strange woman
disappearing into the tunnel.

I felt literally beside myself. What in the world had I done! I had
deliberately let the strange woman take Dick away with her, without
having the remotest idea where she was going or why she had, to all
intents, abducted the boy. It was awful to think of--and I alone was
entirely to blame! Then the thought came back to me that I had told Dick
to have no fear, assuring him that I would be near him all the time.
What would the headmaster say who had confided him to my care? Worse,
what would Sir Roland say when I confessed to him what I had done?

These and other maddening thoughts were crowding into my brain as I
stood upon the platform, dazed, and completely at a loss what to do,
when somebody nudged me. Turning, I recognized at once the man in the
snuff-coloured suit who had told me so rudely "not to shove," and had
then dawdled so while buying his railway ticket. I was about to say
something not very complimentary to him, when he spoke.

"I trust you will forgive my apparent rudeness a moment ago at the
booking-office," he said in a voice I knew quite well, "but there's a
method in my madness. I am Preston--George Preston."

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed, the sudden revulsion of feeling almost
overpowering me. "But do you know what has happened--do you know that
Sir Roland Challoner's son I had charge of has--"

"Don't distress yourself, Mr. Berrington," he interrupted reassuringly,
"I know everything, and more than you know, but I rather feared that
you might see through this disguise. I have been loafing about
Paddington station for nearly an hour. The lady I expected to see
arrived just after seven, and took up her position under the clock. Then
I saw you and the lad arrive; I saw you recognize the woman; I saw you
put yourself out of sight behind the pile of trunks, and talk earnestly
to the lad for a few moments, and I guessed what you were saying to him.
I walked right past you in the sub-way, and intentionally made you miss
this train, because it is inexpedient that you should follow those two.
I know where they are going, and Mr. Osborne knows too; I needn't
trouble to explain to you here how I come to know all this. The thing
you have to do now is to come with me to my house off Regent Street,
where Mr. Osborne awaits us."

Never in my life, I suppose, have I felt so relieved as I did then, for
the mental pain I had endured during these few minutes had been torture.
Indeed, I felt almost indignant with Preston for his having made me
suffer so; but he explained that he had revealed himself to me the
moment he felt justified in doing so. Suddenly a thought occurred to me.

"Do you know," I asked him quickly, "anything of a telegram sent to Eton
this morning, apparently by Sir Roland, saying that Miss Challoner had
been taken suddenly ill, and requesting that his son might be sent home
to Holt at once?"

"Yes, I know, because--I sent it."

"_You_ sent it!"

"Yes--though I didn't write it. Mrs. Stapleton wrote it. She gave it to
her chauffeur, who was in the hall at the Rook Hotel, and when she was
gone he asked me if I would mind handing it in, as I had intentionally
told him I was going to the post office. I was a chauffeur, too, at the
time, chauffeur to 'Baron Poppenheimer,' whom I drove down this morning
in his car ostensibly to see the beautiful widow. 'Baron Poppenheimer'
was, of course, Mr. Osborne. The widow was not at 'The Book' when we
arrived--we knew she wouldn't be, and, of course, you know where she
was, she was at the house in Hampstead where you found Miss Challoner
when you called there this morning; she arrived home about two o'clock,
however, and while 'Baron Poppenheimer' was making himself agreeable to
her--your friend Mr. Osborne is a most splendid actor, and ought to have
been in the detective force--I was making headway with her chauffeur out
in the garage. Yes, Mr. Berrington, you can set your mind at rest--Miss
Challoner is perfectly well. I wonder if by chance you telephoned to
Holt this afternoon."

"I tried to."

"And you couldn't get through? The line was out of order?"

"Yes."

"Good!" Preston exclaimed, his small, intelligent eyes twinkling oddly.
"That is as I thought. One of Gastrell's accomplices set the line out of
order between three and five this afternoon. When the line comes to be
examined the electrician will, unless I am greatly mistaken, find the
flaw at some point between Holt Stacey and Holt Manor--if you should
happen to hear, you might tell me the exact point where they find that
the trouble exists. My theories and my chain of circumstances are
working out splendidly--I haven't as yet made a single false conjecture.
And now come along to my house, and I'll tell you more on the way."

Osborne sat in Preston's sitting-room, smoking a long cigar. He no
longer wore the disguise of "Baron Poppenheimer," or any disguise, and
upon our entry he uttered an exclamation.

"By Jove, Mike," he said, "you are the very man we've been wanting all
day. Where did you disappear to last night?" And turning to Preston he
added, "Were you right? Did he follow the widow and Miss Challoner home
last night?"

"Yes," I answered for him, "I did. Did you see Dulcie at Gastrell's last
night?"

"I should say so--and we saw you gazing at her. You nearly gave yourself
away, Mike; you did, indeed. You ought to be more careful. When we saw
you follow them out of the room, we knew, just as though you had told
us, that you meant to follow them home. And what about the boy?" he
said, addressing Preston. "Did he turn up? And was he met?"

"Yes, just as I expected; but he wasn't met by Sir Roland's butler, of
course. He was met by Doris Lorrimer--you have probably noticed her,
that dark, demure, quietly dressed girl who was at Connie Stapleton's
dinner party at 'The Rook,' and at Gastrell's last night."

"You don't mean to say that she, too, is one of Gastrell's accomplices!"
Jack exclaimed. "It seems impossible--looking like that!"

"I have suspected it for some time. Now I am sure. She has taken Dick
Challoner to Connie Stapleton's house in Hampstead. It's one of the
headquarters of the set, though, of course, the principal headquarters
are at 300 Cumberland Place. How furious Lord Easterton would be if he
knew! He suspects nothing as yet, I think."

"But how do you know that Doris Lorrimer has taken the boy to that
Hampstead house?" Osborne asked quickly; "and why has she taken him?"

"The gang have kidnapped him--it was Connie Stapleton's idea--in order
to get the reward they feel sure Sir Roland will offer for his recovery.
How I know where Doris Lorrimer has taken him is that Connie Stapleton's
chauffeur, with whom I fraternized this afternoon in Newbury, happened
to mention that his mistress had told Miss Lorrimer to be under the
clock at Paddington at seven-fifteen this evening to meet the man with
the parcel,' as she said, and then to take the 'parcel' to her house in
Hampstead! I won't tell you until later how I come to know the
kidnapping was Mrs. Stapleton's idea; I have a reason for not telling
you--yet."

"You certainly are a marvel, George," Jack said, as he blew a cloud
towards the ceiling. "We seem to be well on the way now to running
these scoundrels to ground. I shall be glad to see them
convicted--right glad."

"We are 'on the way'--yes," Preston answered, "but you'll find it a
longer 'way' than you expect, if you are already thinking of
convictions. You don't know--you can't have any idea of--the slimness of
these rogues if you suppose we are as yet anywhere near running them to
ground. Just look how clever they have already been: first there is the
fire in Maresfield Gardens and the discovery of the stabbed and charred
body, for you may depend upon it that fire was meant to conceal some
crime, probably murder, by destroying all traces, including that body
which ought by rights to have been entirely consumed; then there is the
robbery at Holt Manor; then the affair in Grafton Street, with yourself
as the victim; then the murder of Sir Roland's gardener, Churchill--all
these constitute mysteries, undiscovered crimes, and now comes this
business of kidnapping Sir Roland's young son."

We talked at considerable length, discussing past and present
happenings, and arranging our future line of action. Preston was
immensely interested in the cypher messages unravelled by Dick--I had
brought the cuttings with me to show to him and Jack. The reference to
the date of the coming of age of Cranmere's son, considered in
connection with the questions about Cranmere's seat, Eldon Hall, put to
Osborne during his mysterious confinement in Grafton Street, made the
detective almost excited. The unravelling of those cyphers was, he said,
perhaps the most important discovery as yet made. Indeed, he believed
that our knowledge of these messages might simplify matters Sufficiently
to lead directly to the arrest of at any rate some members of the gang
at a much earlier date than he had previously anticipated.

"It is clear," he said, as he put the cuttings into the envelope again
and handed them back to me, "that Gastrell and company contemplate a
coup of some sort either on the day Lord Cranmere's son comes of age, or
on one day during the week of festivities that will follow. 'Clun
Cross.' We must find out where Clun Cross is; probably it's somewhere in
Northumberland, and most likely it's near Eldon Hall. I suppose,
Osborne, that you are invited to the coming of age, as you know
Cranmere so well?"

"Yes, and I mean to go. But Berrington isn't invited; he doesn't know
Cranmere."

"He probably knows what he looks like, though," Preston answered,
laughing--he was thinking of his impersonation of the Earl, and his
wonderful make-up. "I am not invited either, professionally or
otherwise, so that Mr. Berrington and I had better go to Bedlington and
put our heads together there, for something is going to happen at Eldon
Hall, Osborne, you may take my word for that. We mustn't, however,
forget that last cypher message: 'Osborne and Berrington suspect; take
precautions.' 'Precautions' with such people may mean anything. I am
firmly of opinion that poor Churchill's assassination was a
'precautionary' measure. It was on the afternoon before that murder,
remember, that Churchill found the paste buckle at the spot where a grey
car had been seen, left deserted, on the morning of the robbery at Holt.
It was on the afternoon before that murder that he brought the buckle to
Miss Challoner, told her about the grey car he had seen, which, he said,
led him to suspect something, and asked to have the afternoon off. It
was on that same afternoon that Mrs. Stapleton happened to motor over to
Holt, and while there was told by Miss Challoner all about the finding
of the buckle, also all about Churchill's secret suspicion about the
car, and his asking to have the afternoon off, presumably to pursue his
inquiries. And what happened after that? Don't you remember? Mrs.
Stapleton telephoned from Holt to the Book Hotel in Newbury and talked
to someone there--her maid, so she said--for five minutes or more,
talked to her in Polish. Now, does anything suggest itself to either of
you? Don't you think it quite likely that Mrs. Stapleton, hearing from
Miss Challoner all about what had happened, telephoned in Polish certain
instructions to somebody in Newbury, most likely one of her accomplices,
and that those instructions led, directly or indirectly, to Churchill's
being murdered the same night, lest he should discover anything and give
information? One thing I am sure of, though--Mrs. Stapleton's
chauffeur is an honest man who does not in the least suspect what is
going on; who, on the contrary, believes his mistress to be a most
estimable woman, kind, considerate, open-handed. I found that out while
associating with him to-day as a fellow-chauffeur."

It was nearly nine o'clock before we went out into Soho to dine. Preston
told us that he had arranged to call at Willow Road for Dick between ten
and half-past. The three of us were to go to Hampstead and represent
ourselves as being instructed by Sir Roland to take the boy away.
Preston himself would, he said, represent himself as being an Eton
master, and Doris Lorrimer was to be closely cross-questioned as to who
had authorized her to meet the boy and take him to Hampstead and--

Well, Preston had thoroughly thought out his plan of action down to the
smallest detail, and during dinner in the little restaurant in Gerrard
Street, to which he had taken us, he explained it to us fully. Briefly,
his intention was to frighten Doris Lorrimer half out of her senses by
threatening instant prosecution if she did not, then and there, make
certain disclosures which would help on our endeavour to bring to
justice the whole gang with which she was evidently associated.

"But supposing," I hazarded, "we don't see Doris Lorrimer. Supposing we
see only a servant, who assures us that we are mistaken, and that Dick
isn't there. Supposing that Mrs. Stapleton, or even Gastrell, should
confront us. What then?"

"I have carefully considered all those possibilities," Preston answered
lightly as he refilled my glass, then Jack's, and then his own. "If
anything of that kind should happen I shall simply--but there, leave it
to me and I think you will be satisfied with the outcome. You must
remember, Mr. Berrington, that I have been at this sort of thing over
twenty years. Well, here's luck to our enterprise," and, raising his
glass, he clinked it against our glasses in turn, then emptied it at
a draught.

"And now," he said, preparing to rise, "we must be moving. We have
rather a ticklish task before us, though I have no fear whatever as to
its sequel, provided you leave most of the talking to me. In any case
there must be no violence, remember. The only thing I regret is that the
lad will most likely be asleep, so that we shall have to awaken him."

Punctually at half-past ten our taxi drew up outside the house numbered
460 Willow Road, Hampstead.




CHAPTER XVIII


CONTAINS ANOTHER SURPRISE

Lights were in most of the windows, as though a party were in progress.

Preston rang the bell. It was answered at once by a maid who had
answered it in the morning, and before Preston had time to speak the
maid asked us if we would come in. This time she showed us into a room a
good deal larger than the one in which I had been interviewed by
Gastrell in the morning. Very beautifully furnished, on all sides what
is termed the "feminine touch" was noticeable, and among a number of
framed photographs on one of the tables I recognized portraits of
well-known Society people, several with autograph signatures, and one or
two with affectionate inscriptions. I wondered to whom they had been
presented, and to whom the affectionate inscriptions were addressed.

We waited a few minutes, wondering what would happen next, and who would
come in to see us, for the maid had not even asked our names, though I
saw that she had recognized me. For a moment it occurred to me that we
ought to have changed into evening clothes, and I was about to tell
Preston so when the door opened and Jasmine Gastrell entered,
accompanied, to my amazement, by Dulcie Challoner.

I think even Preston was taken aback--and it took a great deal to
astonish Preston. Osborne, I could see, was dumbfounded. Jasmine
Gastrell was the first to speak, and she addressed me without looking
either at Osborne or Preston.

"Good evening, Mr. Berrington," she said, with one of those wonderful
smiles of hers which seemed entirely to transform her expression; "this
is an unexpected pleasure."

How strangely different she now looked from the way she had looked at me
in Cumberland Place when, disguised as Sir Aubrey Belston, I had
pretended to read her past life! She turned to Jack, and, raising her
eye-brows as though she had only that instant recognized him, "Why," she
exclaimed, "it's Mr. Osborne! I had no idea we were to have the pleasure
of seeing you here to-night--had you, Dulcie?"

Dulcie, who was standing by quite unconcernedly, turned at once to me
without answering Mrs. Gastrell's question.

"Dear old Mike," she said, "how delightful of you to have come. I do
hope you have entirely recovered. You looked so ill when you saw me off
at Paddington this morning that I felt anxious about you all the way
home. What was the matter with you? Have you any idea?"

I was so staggered, first at finding her at this house again, and then
at her addressing me in the calm way she did, that for some moments I
could not answer. Jack and Preston, now in conversation with Jasmine
Gastrell, did not notice my hesitation. At last, collecting my scattered
thoughts, I answered:

"I am quite well, Dulcie. There was nothing really much amiss with me
this morning--I thought you knew that."

I stopped abruptly. What else could I say?

Under the circumstances I could not well speak about the telegram, and
say why we had arrived in this way at such an unusual hour.

"I suppose you have come about Dick," she went on suddenly. "He is
asleep now--he was so tired, poor little chap."

"Dulcie," I burst out impetuously under my breath, casting a hurried
glance at the other three, who, still in conversation, did not appear to
notice us. "Dulcie, what is the meaning of all this? Why are you here?
Why is Dick here? I want to see you--I must see you alone as soon as
possible--there is so much I want to say to you, want to ask you; such a
lot has happened during the past day or two that I can't understand, and
that I want to have explained. Tell me, my darling," I went on
hurriedly, "when and where can we can meet--alone?"

She gave a delightful little laugh, and tapped me playfully with her
fan--she and Jasmine were in evening dress. Then, looking roguishly up
into my eyes, she went on:

"So far as Dick is concerned, everything is easily explained. When I got
home this morning I felt very unwell. I found father terribly anxious at
my absence, and Aunt Hannah in what I call one of her fits of tantrums.
I went to lie down, and, while I was asleep, father came and looked at
me. For some reason he got it into his head that I looked very ill, and
just then Connie arrived in her car--she went to Holt direct from
London, as she wanted to explain to father the reason she didn't take me
home last night, and at the same time make her apologies for the anxiety
she knew she must unintentionally have caused him; father, you know,
likes Connie very much. After seeing me in bed he had jumped to the
conclusion that I was really very ill and ought to see a doctor at
once. Connie said that as she was going straight to Newbury she would,
if he liked, send Doctor Claughton out to Holt. Then father said
something about letting Dick know I was ill, and Connie volunteered to
send a telegram to Eton, signed with father's name, and father said he
wished she would. And that is the explanation of the whole affair."

"Explanation!" I exclaimed. "I don't call that half an explanation. What
about James being told to meet Dick at Paddington and then not
turning up?"

"Oh, that was a mistake of Connie's. James was in town to-day, and
Connie understood father to say that he would telegraph to James and
tell him to meet Dick at Paddington. After telegraphing to Eton in
father's name, from Newbury, she found she had made a mistake, so then
she telegraphed to Doris Lorrimer to meet Dick. After the doctor had
seen me, he told father there was nothing to be in the least alarmed
about; in fact gave father to understand that his imagination had played
pranks with him; so then father telephoned to Connie at the Book Hotel,
and they decided there was no need for Dick to come home, and Connie
suggested Dick's spending the night here and returning to Eton
to-morrow."

I did not speak for some moments. At last I said:

"Dulcie, who told you all this?"

"Why, Connie, of course. Father had to attend an important magistrates'
meeting in Newbury this afternoon, and, as I seemed quite well again,
she got father's leave to bring me up to town again to meet some friends
of hers who are here to-night. Now are you satisfied, Mike?"

"No, I am not," I answered bluntly. "Dulcie, have you seen Dick since he
arrived here?"

"No, he had gone to bed before I arrived, and Connie said I had better
not disturb him."

"My darling," I said a moment later, "I must see you alone. When can I?"

"Would to-morrow morning suit you, dear?" she asked, looking at me with
her frank brown eyes. As I returned the gaze I found it impossible to
believe that she had wittingly deceived me that morning, or indeed at
any time, and yet--

"Yes. Shall we say at twelve o'clock?" I suggested. "And shall I call
here for you?"

"That will do beautifully. Oh, Mike, my darling," she said quickly,
under her breath, "I hope you still love me just as much as you did; I
don't know why, but somehow I sometimes feel that you mistrust me--even
that you suspect me of something or other, I don't know what."

"Dulcie!" I exclaimed impulsively, and I made as though to seize her
hand, then remembered we were not alone, and refrained. "Dulcie, there
are things I want you to explain to me, mysteries that only you can
clear up. I don't really mistrust you, my own darling; indeed, indeed I
don't; but I mistrust some of the people you mix with and have made
friends of, more than that, I happen to know that some of them are no
better than adventurers, and I want to get you away from them. What
house is this we are in? I mean whose is it and who lives here?"

But at that instant our conversation was interrupted by Jasmine
Gastrell.

"Oh, you lovers!" she exclaimed, laughing as she looked across at us.
"What heaps and heaps lovers seem to have to tell each other after being
parted for a few hours. It reminds me of my own young days," she added
archly, for she looked barely seven-and-twenty. "Mr. Osborne has just
told me, Dulcie, that he is asked to stay at Eldon Hall for Lord
Cranmere's son's coming of age, on the twenty-eighth. I have been
invited too; I do wish you were going to be there. Connie has accepted."

Ten minutes later, as the three of us sauntered slowly along Willow
Road, we realized--at least I can answer for myself--that in spite of
our careful scheming, and our complete confidence in the success of our
plan, we had been cleverly outwitted. Not for a moment had Preston, or
Jack Osborne, believed the long story that Jasmine Gastrell had related
to them while Dulcie and I had been engrossed in conversation, a story
it is unnecessary to repeat, though it had been told apparently with a
view to leading them to think that Mrs. Gastrell was shortly to make a
tour round the world. In the same way I had not been deceived by the
ingenious tissue of implications and falsehoods that Connie Stapleton
had poured into Dulcie's ear, and that Dulcie had innocently repeated to
me. What most astonished me, however, was the rapidity with which Connie
Stapleton and Jasmine Gastrell seemed able to concoct these ingenious
and plausible narratives to account for anything and everything that
happened on any occasion. A single discrepancy, for instance, in the
story that Dulcie had just repeated to me would have brought the whole
fabric of what appeared to be true statements--though I believed them to
be false--crumbling to the ground. But there had been no such
discrepancy. Everything that had occurred during the afternoon in
relation to Dick, the telegram sent to Eton, Doris Lorrimer's meeting
him in place of Sir Roland's butler, had been accounted for simply and
quite rationally. And yet I felt firmly convinced the statements must in
the main be a series of monstrous untruths, a belief in which Preston,
with all his experience, concurred. Only two points puzzled me. Neither
Jasmine Gastrell nor Connie Stapleton, nor, indeed, anybody else, could
by any possibility have known that Preston, Jack, and I contemplated
calling at the house in Willow Road that evening. How came it, then,
that everything had been so skilfully arranged with a view to disarming
our suspicions when we did call? That, I confess, was a problem so
complicated that it formed the one and only argument in favour of the
story that Dulcie had repeated to me being in part true. The other
puzzling point was Dulcie's being at that house that night, and her
knowing that Dick was there. Surely if Connie Stapleton and her
accomplices had intended to kidnap Dick for the purpose of extorting
money from Sir Roland, they would not intentionally have let Dulcie know
what was happening. And, arguing thus with myself, I began at last to
wonder if, after all, I had been mistaken; if, after all, Mrs. Stapleton
had not invented that story, but had told Dulcie the truth. I confess
that the more I thought it all over and the harder I tried to sift
possible facts from probable fiction the more hopelessly entangled I
became. Perhaps the strongest argument in favour of my theory that we
were being cleverly and systematically hoaxed lay in Dick's discovery of
the cypher messages in the _Morning Post_. There could, at any rate, be
no getting away from the cypher message which had appeared on the
previous day and that ran: "_Osborne and Berrington suspect. Take
precautions_"

Then I thought again of Dulcie. It was appalling, almost incredible,
that she should be allowed to associate with men and women whom we
practically knew to be adventurers, and who might be not merely
adventurers, but criminals masquerading as respectable members of
Society. Yet I was impotent to prevent her; it was, of course, Sir
Roland's duty to forbid her to mix with these people, but then Sir
Roland, from being powerfully attracted by the young widow Connie
Stapleton, was, as I had long ago guessed, becoming deeply enamoured of
her; so that, far from preventing Dulcie from associating with
her--Dulcie, with her strange infatuation for the woman--he deliberately
encouraged the intimacy. Well, next morning, at any rate, I should see
Dulcie alone, I reflected, with a feeling of satisfaction, and then I
would have it out with her and go into the whole affair thoroughly,
speaking to her with brutal frankness--even at the risk of hurting her
feelings and incurring her displeasure I would tell her everything I
knew and all that I suspected. Something must be done, and at once, to
put an end to her absurd attachment to the widow--I had thought it all
over quite long enough; it was now time to act. And Dick too; I must get
hold of him and question him narrowly to find out if his story of what
happened from the time he left me on Paddington platform and went and
stood beside Doris Lorrimer under the clock, and his arrival at Willow
Road, Hampstead, tallied with the story that Connie Stapleton had told
Dulcie, and that Dulcie had related to me--for I somehow fancied that
the two narratives might differ to some extent, if only in their
minor details.

We were approaching Hampstead Tube station when Preston, turning to me
from Jack Osborne, with whom he had been in close conversation,
inquired:

"Has Sir Roland lately said anything to you, Mr. Berrington, that
interested you particularly? Has he thrown out any hint of any sort?"

I reflected.

"Nothing that I can recollect," I said. "Have you reason to suppose that
he has something of special interest that he wants to say to me?"

"I have, but until he speaks it is not for me to make any comment."

We had reached the Tube station. Jack booked to Russell Square; Preston
to Piccadilly Circus; and I took a ticket to Bond Street, those being
the stations nearest to our respective destinations.

"Are you aware," Preston said soon after the train had started, "that
since we left my house and went to dine in Soho, we have been followed?
I wanted to be perfectly certain before telling you, but I see now that
I was right in my suspicion. Look to your left presently, one at a time,
and at the end of the compartment you'll see quite an ordinary-looking
man, apparently a foreigner, smoking a cheroot--the man seated alone,
with a lot of hair on his face."

"You wouldn't notice him if he passed you in the street, would you?" he
said after we had looked, "but I have noticed him all the evening. He
was in Warwick Street when we all came out of my house; he followed us
to Soho; he was in Gerrard Street, awaiting us, when we came out of the
restaurant after dining; he came after us to Hampstead; he has followed
us from Willow Road to the Tube station, and he is in this compartment
now for the purpose of observing us. I want you each not to forget what
he is like, and in a few minutes, when we all separate, I shall be
curious to see which of us he follows--to know which of us he is really
shadowing."

Jack was the first to alight. He bade us each a cheery good night, after
reminding us that we were all three to meet on the following afternoon,
and hurried out. The hairy man with the cheroot remained motionless,
reading his newspaper.

My turn came next--at Oxford Circus station. As I rose, I noticed the
man carelessly fold up his newspaper, cram it into his coat pocket, and
get up. Rather to my surprise I did not, after that, see him again. He
was not with me in the carriage of the train I changed into, nor was he,
apparently, on the platform at Bond Street station when I got out. As I
pushed my latch-key into the outer door of South Molton Street Mansions,
I glanced quickly up and down the street, but, so far as I could see,
there was no sign of the man.

However, a surprise awaited me. Upon entering my flat I noticed a light
in the sitting-room at the end of the little passage--the door stood
ajar. Entering quickly, I uttered an exclamation of amazement. For in
the big arm-chair in front of the fire--the fire burned as though it had
lately been made up--Dick lay back fast asleep, his lips slightly
parted, his chest rising and falling in a way that showed how heavily
he slept.

Recovering from my amazement, I stood for a minute or two watching him.
How delightful he looked when asleep like that, and what a strong
resemblance he bore to Dulcie. But how came he to be here? And how came
Dulcie to have told me, less than an hour before, that he was in the
house at Hampstead, and asleep there? Gazing down upon him still, I
wondered what really had happened since I had last seen him that
evening, and what story he would have to tell me when he awoke.

My man had gone to bed, for it was now past midnight. Considering where
I had better put Dick to sleep, my glance rested upon some letters lying
on the table. Mechanically I picked them up and looked at the
handwritings on the envelopes. Nothing of interest, I decided, and I was
about to put them down again, unopened, when I noticed there was one
from Holt that I had overlooked. The handwriting was Sir Roland's.
Hastily tearing open the envelope, I pulled out the letter. It was quite
short, but its contents sent my heart jumping into my mouth, and had
Dick not been asleep close by in the chair I believe I should have used
some almost unprintable language.

"Oh, the fool--the silly, doddering, abject old fool!" I exclaimed aloud
as I flung the open letter down on to the table and began to pace the
room in a fury of indignation. "'No fool like an old fool'--oh, those
words of wisdom--the man who first uttered them should have a monument
erected to his memory," I continued aloud; then suddenly, as Dick
stirred in his sleep, I checked myself abruptly.

The letter Sir Roland Challoner had written to me ran as follows:

"My dear Mike,--As you and Dulcie are engaged, I dare say you will be
interested, and you may be surprised, to hear of another engagement. I
have asked Dulcie's beautiful friend, Mrs. Stapleton, to become my wife,
and she has done me the honour of accepting my proposal. Write to
congratulate me, my dear Mike, and come down again soon to stay with us.

"Yours affectionately,

"ROLAND CHALLONER."




CHAPTER XIX


"IN THE PAPERS"

Dick was sleeping so heavily that he hardly stirred when I picked him
up, carried him into my bedroom, laid him on my bed and loosened his
clothes; I had decided to sleep on the settee in the room adjoining.
Soon after seven next morning I was awakened by hearing him moving
about. He had made himself quite at home, I found, for he had had a bath
and used my towels and hair-brushes and found his way into a pair of
my slippers.

"I hope you don't mind," he said apologetically, after telling me what
he had done. "And now shall I tell you how I come to be here, Mike?" he
added, clambering up on to my bed and lying down beside me.

I told him I wanted to know everything, and at once, and, speaking in
his rapid, vivacious way, he went on to explain exactly what
had occurred.

It seemed that when he went and stood by Doris Lorrimer under the clock
at Paddington station, she had, as I had told him she probably would,
asked him if he were Dick Challoner. Upon his telling her that he was,
she said that she had been sent to meet him, and asked him to come with
her. She had not told him where they were going, but when she got out at
Baker Street station and he got out after her, a man had suddenly come
up to her and said he wished to speak to her privately. She had told
Dick to wait, and had then walked a little way away with the man, and
for about ten minutes they had stood together, conversing in undertones.

"What was the man like?" I interrupted.

Dick described him rather minutely--he said he had taken special notice
of his appearance "because he was such a hairy man"--and before he had
done I felt practically certain the man who had met Doris Lorrimer was
the foreign-looking man who had shadowed Preston, Jack, and myself the
night before.

"I think," Dick went on, "the lady altered her plans after meeting that
man; because for some moments after he had gone she seemed undecided
what to do. Finally she went out of the station, hailed a taxi in Baker
Street, told me to get into it, and then said something to the driver
that I couldn't hear. We went straight down Baker Street, down Orchard
Street--I noticed the names of both streets--then turned to the right
and stopped at a house in Cumberland Place. As you had disappeared, I
was beginning to feel a bit frightened, Mike,--I didn't much like the
woman, who had spoken hardly a word to me all the time,--so just as she
got out of the taxi on the left side, I quickly opened the door on the
right side, popped out while her back was still turned, and ran away as
hard as I could, leaving my suit-case in the taxi. It was very dark, and
I believe that until after she had paid the driver she can't have missed
me, as nobody came after me."

"Well, and what did you do then?"

"As soon as I had got well away, I went up to a policeman and asked him
the way to South Molton Street. He explained clearly, and I came
straight on here and asked for you. Your man, Simon, said you weren't
in, and that he didn't know when you would be, so I asked if I might
come in and wait, as I said I had something important to say to you. Of
course he knew me by sight from seeing me with you sometimes, so he said
'Certainly,' and put me into your sitting-room. It was past eight when I
got here. I was awfully hungry, so I ate all the cake and all the
biscuits I found in the sideboard in your dining-room, and then I sat
down in your big chair to wait for you--and I suppose I then
fell asleep."

This report interested me a good deal, and I was still pondering it when
my man came in with my letters and the newspaper, which he always
brought to me before I got up. After reading my letters I picked up the
newspaper, telling Dick to lie still and not disturb me until I had
glanced through it. I had read the principal items of news, when
suddenly my attention became centred upon an article which was headed:

AMAZING SERIES OF ROBBERIES
POLICE COMPLETELY BAFFLED

The article made up nearly a column of closely set type, and ran as
follows:

Within a brief period of three months, that is to say since the
beginning of December last, no less than eleven great robberies have
been committed in various parts of Great Britain. Up to the present,
however, no clue of any sort has been obtained that seems likely to lead
to the discovery of the perpetrators of any one of these crimes. The
victims of these robberies are the following:

Here followed a list of names of eleven well-known rich people; the
names of the houses where the robberies had been committed; a brief
description of the method employed by the thieves; and the value,
approximately, of the property stolen in each case. The houses were for
the most part large country mansions situated in counties far apart, and
"Holt Manor, Sir Roland Challoner's seat in Berkshire," figured in the
list. The article then continued:

When eleven such serious robberies, as we may rightly term them, are
committed in comparatively rapid succession, and our police and
detective force, in spite of their vaunted ability, prove themselves
unable to effect a single arrest, what, we have a right to ask, is amiss
with our police, or with their methods, or with both?

Questioned upon the subject, a well-known Scotland Yard Inspector
yesterday informed our representative that official opinion inclines to
the belief that the crimes mentioned have one and all been effected by a
group of amazingly clever criminals working in combination. "How many
members the gang consists of," he said, "how they obtained the special
information they must have possessed to enable them to locate so
accurately the exact whereabouts of the valuables they seized, and how
they succeeded in securing those valuables in broad daylight, we have
not the remotest notion. The theory held at present," he continued, "is
that a number of expert thieves have by some means succeeded in becoming
intimate with the owners of the houses that have been robbed. We
repudiate entirely the theory that servants in the different houses must
have been accomplices in the robberies either directly or indirectly."

The article then proceeded to advance a number of apparently plausible
theories to account for the non-discovery of the thieves, and finally
ended as follows:

If, then, our police and detectives would retain, or rather regain,
their prestige, it is incumbent upon them at once to take steps to
prevent any further outrages of this kind. Otherwise the police of Great
Britain will run a grave risk of becoming the laughing-stock of
Continental countries, where, we make bold to state, such a series of
robberies, all more or less of the same nature, and involving a loss of,
in the aggregate, approximately L50,000, would not thus have been
committed with impunity.

I handed Dick the paper. When he had carefully read the article right
through, he looked up abruptly.

"By Jove," he exclaimed, "I have an idea!"

I waited. For some moments he was silent. Then he continued:

"Do you remember the account of the robbery at Thatched Court, near
Bridport? It's one of the robberies mentioned in this list."

"I can't say I do," I answered. "I don't read the newspapers very
carefully. Why?"

"I happened to read that account, and remember it rather well. The
robbery took place about five weeks ago--the house was entered while
everybody, including some of the servants, was at a race-meeting. Among
the things stolen was a pair of shot-guns made by Holland and Holland."

"But what on earth has that to do with anything? Where does the 'idea'
come in?"

"It doesn't come in--there. It comes in later. You know that every
shot-gun has a number on it, and so can be identified. Now, if these
thieves are people who are pretending to be gentlemen--how do you put
it? There's a word you use for that, but I've forgotten it."

"Do you mean masquerading as gentlemen?"

"Masquerading--that's the word I was thinking of; if they are
masquerading as gentlemen they'll probably keep good guns like that to
shoot with--they can do that, or think they can, without running much
risk, whereas if they sold them they'd run rather a big risk of being
caught, because I happen to remember that the numbers of the stolen guns
were mentioned in the newspaper account of the robbery. They said the
guns were in a case, and almost new. Now, this is where my idea 'comes
in,' as you put it. I heard you tell Dulcie only the other day that you
wanted a pair of guns by a tip-top maker. Just afterwards I happened to
hear her talking to Mrs. Stapleton about her wedding--by the way, Mike,
have you fixed the date yet?"

"Not yet. But what about Mrs. Stapleton?"

"Well, Dulcie spoke about wedding presents, just casually in course of
conversation, and I heard her tell Mrs. Stapleton that you had said you
hoped among your wedding presents there would be a good gun, 'or, better
still, a pair,' I heard her say that you said. Mrs. Stapleton didn't
answer at once, but I noticed a queer sort of expression come on to her
face, as if she'd just thought of something, and presently she said: 'I
have a good mind, darling, to give him a pair of guns that belonged to
my poor husband. They are quite new--he can't have used them more than
once or twice, if that. They were made by a Bond Street gun-maker he
always went to, one of the best in London.' Mike, is Holland and
Holland's shop in Bond Street?"

"Yes," I answered, "at the top of Bond Street. Oh, but there are several
good gun-makers in Bond Street. Besides, why should Mrs. Stapleton give
me such a present as that? I really hardly know her."

"Wait until I've finished, Mike, you always jump at conclusions so.
Dulcie said almost at once: 'Oh, don't do that, Connie. Mike wouldn't
expect such a present as that from you. He mightn't like to take it; you
see, you hardly know him really'--just what you have this moment said.
Then Dulcie said: 'I tell you what I wish you would do, Connie--let me
buy them from you to give to him. What shall I give you for them?' I
believe that was what Mrs. Stapleton had been driving at all the
time--she wanted to sell the guns without running any risk, for of
course you would never think of noticing the numbers on them, and nobody
would ever suppose that guns given to you by Dulcie, apparently new
guns, were guns that had been stolen. In the end Dulcie said she would
give Mrs. Stapleton eighty pounds for the pair, and that was agreed
upon, so that Dulcie has practically bought them for you, in fact she
may have paid Mrs. Stapleton for them already. Now look here, I'll get
hold of that newspaper that gave the numbers of the guns, and I bet you
when Dulcie gives you those guns you'll find they're marked with the
numbers of the stolen guns."

"Dick," I said thoughtfully, after a moment's pause, "were you
eavesdropping when you heard all this?"

"Why, no, of course not!" he exclaimed indignantly. "I was in the room,
reading a book, and I couldn't help hearing all they said, though they
were talking in undertones."

I turned over in my bed, and looked into his eyes for an instant or two.

"Would you be surprised to hear, Dick," I said slowly, watching to see
what effect my words would have upon him, "would you be surprised to
hear that Dulcie gave me a pair of guns, as her wedding present, only
last week?"

Dick sprang up in the bed.

"Did she?" he cried out, clapping his hands. "Oh--Mike, tell me, are
they Holland guns?"

I nodded.

Dick jumped off the bed and began to caper about the room.

"Have you got them here?" he exclaimed at last, as his excitement began
to subside.

"They are in the next room. You shall see them after breakfast."

I had difficulty in calming Dick's excitement and inducing him to eat
his breakfast, and directly breakfast was over I took him into the next
room, produced the gun-case, pulled out the two pairs of barrels, and
together we examined the numbers stamped upon them. Dick wrote the
numbers down in the little notebook he always carried in his trousers
pocket, and a little later we drove down to Fleet Street to look up the
file of the newspaper in which Dick had, he declared, read the report of
the robbery at Thatched Court, near Bridport.

I confess that I had not placed much faith in Dick's theory about the
numbers. I had taken him down to Fleet Street chiefly because he had so
earnestly entreated me to. When, therefore, after turning up the report,
Dick discovered, with a shout of triumph, that the numbers on my guns
were actually identical with the numbers mentioned in the newspaper as
those of the stolen guns, I was not merely greatly astonished, but also
considerably perturbed.

"Dick," I said thoughtfully, when I had to some extent recovered from my
surprise, "I really think we shall have to make a private detective of
you. Would you like me to take you now to one of the most famous
detectives in London--a man who was connected with Scotland Yard for
twenty years, who is helping Mr. Osborne to try to discover who the
thieves are who robbed Holt Manor, and who it was who killed poor
Churchill?"

"Do you mean Mr. Preston?" the boy asked quickly, peering up at me out
of his intelligent brown eyes.

"Yes. I suppose you have heard Mr. Osborne and me speak of him."

"Of course I have, and I should love to see him. Are you going to see
him now?"

"I am going straight to him to tell him of your discovery of these
numbers. He already knows all about your having deciphered the newspaper
cyphers; in fact, he has the cuttings at this moment, and your
translation of them. He told me the other day that he would like to
meet you."

Preston was at home at his house in Warwick Street, off Recent Street.
In a few words I had explained everything to him, and at once he
grew serious.

"The unfortunate part," he said at last, "is that in spite of this young
man's sharpness in making this discovery, it really leaves us almost
where we were, unless--"

"Unless what?" I asked, as he paused, considering.

"Well, Mr. Berrington, it's like this," he said bluntly. "You are
engaged to be married to Miss Challoner, and she gives you a wedding
present--a pair of new guns; at least they are to all intents new, and
naturally she expects you to think they are, and might be vexed if she
thought you had found out that she picked them up as a bargain. Now, it
all turns on this: Have you the moral courage to tell your _fiancee_
that you believe the wedding present she has given you is part of the
plunder secured in a recent robbery, indeed that you know it is, and
that therefore you and she are unwittingly receivers of stolen goods? I
have never myself been in love, so far as I can recollect, but if I were
placed as you are I think I should hardly have the courage to
disillusion the young lady."

I am bound to admit that until he put this problem to me it had not
occurred to me to look at the matter in that light, and now I felt much
as Preston declared he would feel if he were in my place. Dulcie might
not mind my having discovered that she had picked up the guns as a
bargain--indeed, why should she? But when it came to hinting--as I
should have to do if I broached the matter at all--that I believed that
her great friend Connie Stapleton knew, when she sold the guns to her,
that they had been stolen--Connie Stapleton, who was about to become her
stepmother--

No, I shouldn't have the pluck to do it. I shouldn't have the pluck to
face the storm of indignation that I knew my words would stir up in
her--women are logical enough, in spite of all that the ignorant and
unthinking urge to the contrary, but in this particular case Dulcie
would, I felt perfectly certain, "round" upon me, and, in the face of
evidence, no matter how damning, declare that I was, to say the least,
mistaken. She would go at once to Connie Stapleton and tell her
everything, and immediately Connie Stapleton would invent some plausible
story which would entirely clear her of all responsibility, and from
that moment onward I should probably be her bitterest enemy. No, I
thought; better, far better, say nothing--perhaps some day circumstances
might arise which would of themselves lead to Mrs. Stapleton's, so to
speak, "giving herself away." Indeed, in face of the discovery, I now
decided not to make certain statements to Sir Roland that I had fully
intended to make. After all, he was old enough to be my father, and if a
man old enough to be my father could be so foolish as to fall in love
with an adventuress, let him take the consequences. I should not so much
have minded incurring Sir Roland's wrath, but, knowing him as well as I
did, I felt positive that anything I might say would only strengthen his
trust in and attachment to this woman he had decided to wed. He might
even turn upon me and tell me to my face that I was striving to oppose
his marriage because his marrying must, of course, affect my pecuniary
position--an old man who falls in love becomes for the time, I have
always maintained, mentally deranged.

Preston conversed at considerable length with Dick Challoner, and, by
the time I rose to leave--for I had to call at Willow Street for Dulcie
at noon--the two appeared to have become great friends.

"I shall take you with me to call for Dulcie," I said to Dick as we went
out. "Then we shall drive you to Paddington, put you in the train for
Windsor, and leave you to your own devices."

"I wish I hadn't lost my suit-case," Dick observed ruefully. "I bet
anything it's in that house in Cumberland Place where the taxi
stopped--unless the woman who met me at Paddington intentionally left it
in the taxi when she found I had jumped out and run away. We ought to
inquire at Scotland Yard, oughtn't we?"

We arrived at Willow Road, Hampstead, at ten minutes to twelve. Telling
Dick to remain in the taxi, I got out and rang the bell. The door was
opened by a maid I had not seen before, and when I inquired for Miss
Challoner she stared at me blankly--indeed, as I thought, suspiciously.

"Nobody of that name lives here," she said curtly. Quickly I glanced up
at the number on the door. No, I had not mistaken the house.

"She is staying here," I said, "staying with Mrs. Stapleton."

"With Mrs. who?"

"Mrs. Stapleton."

"You have mistaken the house. There's nobody of that name here."

"Well, Mr. Gastrell, then," I said irritably. "Ask Mr. Gastrell if I can
see him."

"I tell you, sir, you've come to the wrong house," the maid said
sharply.

"Then who does live here?" I exclaimed, beginning to lose my temper.

The maid looked me up and down.

"I'm not going to tell you," she answered; and, before I could speak
again, she had shut the door in my face.




CHAPTER XX


PRESTON AGAIN

I had seen Dick off at Paddington, after asking the guard to keep an eye
on him as far as Windsor, and was walking thoughtfully through the park
towards Albert Gate, when a man, meeting me where the paths cross, asked
if he might speak to me. Almost instantly I recognized him. It was the
man who had followed Preston, Jack, and myself on the previous night,
and been pointed out to us by Preston.

"I trust," he said, when I had asked him rather abruptly what he wanted
to speak to me about, "that you will pardon my addressing you, sir, but
there is something rather important I should like to say to you if you
have a few minutes to spare."

"Who are you?" I inquired. "What's your name?"

"I would rather not tell you my name," he answered, "and for the moment
it is inadvisable that you should know it. Shall we sit here?" he added,
as we came to a wooden bench.

I am rather inquisitive, otherwise I should not have consented to his
proposal. It flashed across me, however, that whereas there could be no
harm in my listening to what he wished to say, he might possibly have
something really of interest to tell me.

"You are probably not aware," he said, when we were seated, "that I
followed you last night from a house in Warwick Street, Regent Street,
to a restaurant in Gerrard Street, Soho; thence to Willow Road, near
Hampstead Station; and thence to South Molton Street Mansions. Two
gentlemen were with you."

"And may I ask why you did that?" I said carelessly, as I lit a
cigarette.

"That is my affair," he replied. "You have lately been associating with
several men and women who, though you may not know it, belong to a gang
of exceedingly clever criminals. These people, while mixing in Society,
prey upon it. Until last night I was myself a member of this gang; for a
reason that I need not at present mention I have now disassociated
myself from it for ever. To-day my late accomplices will discover that I
have turned traitor, as they will term it, and at once they will set to
work to encompass my death," he added. "I want you, Mr. Berrington, to
save me from them."

I stared at him in surprise.

"But how can I do that, and why should I do it?" I said shortly. "I
don't know who you are, and if you choose to aid and abet criminals you
have only yourself to thank when they turn upon you."

"Naturally," he answered, with what looked very like a sneer; "I don't
ask you to do anything in return for nothing, Mr. Berrington. But if you
will help in this crisis, I can, and will, help you. At this moment you
are at a loss to know why, when you called at Willow Road an hour or so
ago, the woman who opened the door assured you that you had come to the
wrong house. You inquired first for Miss Challoner, then for Mrs.
Stapleton, and then for Hugesson Gastrell--am I not right?"

"Well, you are," I said, astonished at his knowledge.

"I was in the hall when you called, and I heard you. Gastrell, Mrs.
Stapleton, and Miss Challoner were also in the house. They are there
now, but to-night they go to Paris--they will cross from Newhaven to
Dieppe. It was to tell you they were going to Paris that I wished to
speak to you now--at least that was one reason."

"And what are the other reasons?" I asked, with an affectation of
indifference that I was far from feeling.

"I want money, Mr. Berrington, that is one other reason," the stranger
said quickly. "You can afford to pay for information that is worth
paying for. I know everything about you, perhaps more than you yourself
know. If you pay me enough, I can probably protect myself against these
people who until yesterday were my friends, but are now my enemies. And
I can put you in possession of facts which will enable you, if you act
circumspectly, presently to get the entire gang arrested."

"At what time do the three people you have just named leave for Paris?"
I asked, for the news that Connie Stapleton and Dulcie were going to
France together had given me a shock.

"To-night, at nine."

"Look here," I exclaimed, turning upon him sharply, "tell me everything
you know, and if it is worth paying for I'll pay."

In a few minutes the stranger had put several startling facts into my
possession. Of these the most important were that on at least four
occasions Connie Stapleton had deliberately exercised a hypnotic control
over Dulcie, and thus obtained even greater influence over her than she
already possessed; that Jack Osborne, whom I had always believed to be
wholly unsusceptible to female influence, was fast falling in love, or,
if not falling in love, becoming infatuated with Jasmine Gastrell--the
stranger declared that Mrs. Gastrell had fallen in love with him, but
that I could not believe; that an important member of this notorious
gang of criminals which mixed so freely in Society was Sir Roland's
wastrel brother, Robert, of whom neither Sir Roland nor any member of
his family had heard for years; and that Mrs. Stapleton intended to
cause Dulcie to become seriously ill while abroad, then to induce Sir
Roland to come to France to see her, and finally to marry him on the
other side of the Channel in the small town where she intended that
Dulcie should be taken ill. There were reasons, he said, though he would
not reveal them then, why she wished to marry Sir Roland on the
Continent instead of in England, and she knew of no other way of
inducing him to cross the Channel but the means she intended to employ.

The man hardly stopped speaking when I sprang to my feet.

"How much do you want for the information you have given me?" I
exclaimed, hardly able to conceal the intense excitement I felt.

He named a high figure, and so reckless did I feel at that instant that
I told him I would pay the amount to him in gold--he had stipulated for
gold--if he would call at my flat in South Molton Street at five o'clock
on the following afternoon.

His expressions of gratitude appeared, I must say, to be most genuine.

"And may I ask," he said, "what you propose to do now?"

"Propose to do!" I cried. "Why, go direct to Willow Road, of course,
force an entrance, and take Miss Challoner away--by force, if need be."

"You propose to go there alone?"

"Yes. For the past fortnight I have somehow suspected there might be
some secret understanding between Mr. Osborne and Mrs. Gastrell--they
have been so constantly together, though he has more than once assured
me that his intimacy was only with a view to obtaining her confidence. I
don't know why I should believe your word, the word of a stranger, in
preference to his, but now you tell me what you have told me I remember
many little things which all point to the likelihood of your statement
that he is in love with Mrs. Gastrell being true."

"I wouldn't go alone, Mr. Berrington," the stranger said in a tone of
warning. "You don't know the people you have to deal with as I know
them. If you would like to come to Paris with me to-night I could show
you something that would amaze you--and you would come face to face
there with Connie Stapleton and Miss Challoner, and others. Be advised
by me, and do that. I am telling you to do what I know will be best for
you. I don't ask you to pay me until we return to England."

I paused, uncertain what to decide. Thoughts crowded my brain.
Supposing, after all, that this were a ruse to entrap me. Supposing that
Dulcie were not going to Paris. But no, the man's statements seemed
somehow to carry conviction.

"If we cross by the same boat as they do," I said suddenly, "we shall be
recognized."

He smiled grimly.

"Not if you disguise yourself as you did at Hugesson Gastrell's the
other night," he said.

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed, "how do you know that?"

He looked to right and left, then behind him. Nobody was near. Then,
raising his hat, like lightning he pulled off his wig, eyebrows and
moustache, whiskers and beard, crammed them into his jacket pocket, and,
with his hat on the back of his head, sat back looking at me with a
quiet smile of amusement.

"Preston!" I gasped. "Good heavens, man, how do you do it?"

Producing his cigarette case, in silence he offered me a cigarette. Then
he spoke--now in his natural voice.

"I always test my 'impersonations' when I get a chance of doing so," he
said, "upon people who know me well, because if one can completely
deceive one's friends it gives much confidence when one comes to serious
business. Mr. Berrington, all I have just told you is absolute truth. I
have found it all out within the last eleven hours. More than that, I am
myself now one of the gang, and if I 'turn traitor' I shall be done to
death by them just as certainly as I am sitting here. I flatter myself
that I have arranged it all rather cleverly--I have succeeded in placing
in confinement that man who shadowed you last night, without any member
of the gang's knowing anything about his arrest or in the least
suspecting it, and I have literally stepped into his shoes, for these
clothes and boots that I am wearing are his. I believe the end of this
abominable conspiracy is now within sight. To-night you must come with
me to Paris on the boat that Miss Challoner, the woman Stapleton,
Gastrell, and one or two others will cross by. I shall assume the
disguise I have just removed. You will become once more Sir Aubrey
Belston, we shall travel from Victoria in separate compartments, and on
board the boat I shall casually mention to my 'friends' that Sir Aubrey
Belston is on board. In Paris we ought to find out a lot--I have a
friend there named Victor Albeury, who already knows a lot about this
affair--and we shall, unless I am greatly mistaken. Now I must go home
and get some hours of sleep, for I have been busy since we parted in the
'Tube' at Oxford Circus at midnight last night."

"But tell me," I exclaimed, my brain a whirl, "is what you told me
really true: that Osborne has become a victim to the wiles of Jasmine
Gastrell?"

"Absolutely. I have suspected as much for several weeks, and last night
I discovered it to be an absolute fact. Mr. Berrington, when Osborne
left us last night at Russell Square station he didn't return to his
hotel. Would you believe it, he had an assignation with the woman, and
kept it? But what is more curious still is what you wouldn't believe
when I told it to you some minutes ago--Jasmine Gastrell has fallen
madly in love with Osborne! Isn't it astonishing? To think that an
amazingly clever woman like that should let her heart get the better of
her head. But it's not the first case of the sort that I have known. I
could tell you of several similar instances of level-headed women of the
criminal class letting their hearts run away with them, and some day I
will. But now I really must leave you. Go back to your place, pack as
much luggage as you will need for a week or ten days--for we may be away
that long--write Sir Aubrey Belston's name on the luggage labels in a
disguised handwriting; send it to Victoria by messenger--not by your own
man, as we must take no risks whatever--and come to me not later than
six, and I will then again disguise you as Sir Aubrey Belston. You won't
be followed by any member of the gang, for the man I am impersonating
is supposed to be shadowing you. Connie Stapleton expects Alphonse
Furneaux--that's the man who followed you last night, and whom I am now
impersonating--to meet her at Victoria at a quarter past eight to-night.
You will get there a little later, and of course we must appear to be
total strangers. Keep out of sight of the woman, and of Gastrell, and of
anyone else you may see whom you remember seeing at Cumberland Place the
other night. You can speak to anybody you like once we are on board the
boat, but not before. The train leaves at nine. My! I am disappointed
with Osborne, more disappointed and disgusted than I can tell you. And
to think that if I had not made this discovery about him he might
unwittingly have brought about some fearful tragedy so far as you and I
are concerned! But I must really go," and, with a friendly nod, he rose
and strolled away.

He had spoken rapidly, with hardly a pause, and as I watched him pass
out of the park I wondered how he had managed to ingratiate himself with
this gang of scoundrels. Only a day or two before we had discussed the
advisability of informing Easterton of what was taking place nightly in
the house in Cumberland Place which he had leased to Hugesson Gastrell,
but we had come to the conclusion that no good end would be served by
telling him, for were any complaint to be made to Gastrell he would of
course declare that the people who gambled in the house were personal
friends of his whom he had every right to invite there to play.

I returned to my flat, told my man what to pack, then went out again and
walked aimlessly about the streets. A feeling of restlessness was upon
me, which I could not overcome. Many strange things had happened since
Christmas, but this, surely, was the strangest thing of all, that Jack
Osborne, who had persuaded me to help him in his self-imposed task of
tracking down these people, should actually have come under the spell of
Jasmine Gastrell's beauty and undeniable fascination. I recollected now
his saying, when, weeks before, he had spoken of Jasmine Gastrell for
the first time, that everybody on board the ship had fallen in love with
her, and that he himself had been desperately attracted by her. But I
had thought that he spoke in jest; it had not occurred to me that he
really thought seriously about the woman. Of late, however, his manner
towards her had certainly been different, and I knew that night after
night the two had spent the evening together, ending up with supper at
one of the fashionable restaurants.

Then my thoughts drifted to Dulcie. What had come over her since she had
formed this violent attachment for Connie Stapleton? In some ways she
seemed unchanged, yet in other respects she was completely altered. For
a brief ten days after we had become engaged I had seemed to be all in
all to her. But from then onward she had appeared to come more and more
under the influence of her friend, who seemed, in a sense, to be
supplanting me in her affection. And now Preston had told me that
several times Connie Stapleton had intentionally hypnotized Dulcie, no
doubt for the purpose of obtaining greater control over her and still
further bending her will to hers. I could not, under the circumstances,
wholly blame Dulcie for what I had at first believed to be a change in
her attitude towards me. Far more readily could I blame her father for
his monstrous infatuation for the widow.

And what could be the meaning of this sudden flitting to Paris? Preston
had given the reason, had explained it in detail, but his theory was so
horrible that I refused to believe it. Connie Stapleton might be, and
obviously was, an adventuress, but surely a woman of such beauty, with
such charm of manner and personality, and apparently so refined, could
not actually be the monster Preston would have had me believe. The view
I held was that Connie Stapleton and some of her accomplices for some
reason found it expedient to forsake England for a little while--
Preston had assured me that they meant to remain upon the Continent for
several weeks at least--and that the woman thought that by taking Dulcie
with her she would be better able to persuade Sir Roland to cross the
Channel, a thing he had done only once in his life, and that I had heard
him declare he would never do again, so ill had he been on
that occasion.

One of the first men I saw upon my arrival at Victoria in my disguise
was Preston disguised as Alphonse Furneaux. With him were Connie
Stapleton, Dulcie, Gastrell, and one or two men I did not remember
having seen before. Doris Lorrimer was also there.

Obsequious officials were hurrying about doing their bidding, in
anticipation of generous _largesse_. Here and there little groups of
passengers stood staring at them, obviously under the impression that
they must be people of some importance. Acting upon Preston's
instructions I kept well out of sight until within a minute or two of
nine o'clock, by which time the widow and her companions had entered
their saloon carriage.

I had hardly stepped into my first-class compartment, which was some way
behind the saloon, and settled myself comfortably for the journey to
Newhaven, when a lady, the only other occupant, suddenly exclaimed:

"Aubrey, don't you recognize me, or are you intentionally cutting me?"

I glanced across at her. She was a woman of middle age, obviously a
lady, well dressed, but not good-looking. Hastily recovering my presence
of mind, I answered quickly:

"I beg your pardon. Please don't think me rude; I was worrying about a
trunk of mine that I think has been left behind, and for the moment I
didn't see you"--she was seated on the opposite side, in the corner
farthest from me.

"Of course I don't think you rude, you foolish boy," she exclaimed
gaily. "How could I? And how are you, dear? and where are you going? I
had no idea you had already returned from your travels."

"I got back only last week," I said, feeling my way cautiously. "How
well you are looking. Let me see, when was it we last met?"

She broke into a ripple of laughter.

"Oh, Aubrey," she exclaimed, "what a wag you are! When are you going to
grow up, I wonder. Now, do be serious and answer that question I put to
the last night we were together."

This was awful. The train had only just started, and here I was face to
face with a woman evidently an intimate friend of Sir Aubrey Belston's,
who for aught I knew might insist on talking to me and cross-questioning
me all the way to Newhaven. I decided to take the bull by the horns.

"Look here," I exclaimed, becoming suddenly serious, "don't let us talk
about that any more. The answer I gave you that night was final. I have
thought the whole thing over carefully, and, much as I should like to,
I can't change my mind."

She stared at me, evidently dumbfounded. I thought she looked rather
frightened. Her lips parted as if she were going to speak again, then
shut tightly. A minute or more passed, during which time she kept her
head averted, gazing out into the darkness. And then all at once, to my
horror, she burst into tears, and began sobbing hysterically.

The sight of a woman in tears always affects me strangely. I rose from
my seat and went over to her, and, now seated facing her, endeavoured by
every means I could think of to soothe her.

"Don't cry--oh, please don't," I said sympathetically. "It isn't my
fault, you know; I would do anything I could for you, I am sure you know
that, but what you ask is impossible."

"But _why_ is it impossible?" she suddenly burst out impetuously,
looking up into my face with tear-stained eyes. "Give me a good reason
for your refusal and I won't say a word more."

Oh, if only I knew what it was she had asked Sir Aubrey that night--what
it was she wanted him to do. Never in my life before had I been in such
an awful predicament. And then suddenly it flashed upon me that some day
she would for certain meet the real Sir Aubrey Belston again, and what
would happen then when she referred to this meeting in the train and he
stoutly denied--as of course he would--meeting her at all? What mischief
might I not unwittingly be doing? What havoc might I not be creating? If
only I could discover her name it might in some way help me to get out
of this terrible tangle.

The train was slowing down now. Presently it stopped. We were at
Croydon. The door opened and other travellers entered our compartment.
Putting some of my belongings on to my seat, I passed into the corridor
and entered a smoking compartment.

The man seated opposite me was buried in a newspaper. Some moments after
the train had started again, he lowered it, and I saw his face. At once
he raised his eyebrows in recognition; then, extending his hand, greeted
me most cordially.

I was face to face again with Hugesson Gastrell!




CHAPTER XXI


A CHANNEL MYSTERY

Nobody could have seemed more friendly or more thoroughly pleased to see
me again than Hugesson Gastrell as he grasped me heartily by the hand,
expressing surprise at our meeting so unexpectedly.

On the night I had talked to him at Cumberland Place, when I was
masquerading for the first time as Sir Aubrey Belston, I had experienced
a growing feeling of revulsion against him, and now as he took my hand
the same feeling returned and I could not dispel it, for the thought had
flashed in upon me: could it be that I was shaking hands with a man
whose hand was stained with blood? I had, of course, no proof that
Gastrell had committed murder, but in face of what Harold Logan had told
Sir Roland Challoner and myself upon his death bed, added to other
things I knew, it seemed well within the bounds of possibility that--

"And are you crossing to France?" he inquired, cutting my train of
thought.

"Yes," I answered mechanically.

"Going to Paris?"

"Yes."

"Why, how capital!" he exclaimed. "You must make one of our party on the
boat, and when we land. Connie Stapleton will be delighted to meet you
again, Sir Aubrey; she is on this train, and so are other mutual
friends. Connie was speaking of you not half an hour ago."

"Indeed?" I said, feeling that I must say something.

"Why, yes. Try one of these cigars, Sir Aubrey," he added, producing a
large gold case from his inside breast pocket.

I had to take one, though I hated doing it. I tried to look him in the
face as I did so, but I couldn't. It was not that I feared he might
recognize me, for I did not--experience had proved to me that my
disguised appearance and voice were most effectual. But there was
something about the man that repelled me, and I hated meeting his gaze.

The noise of the train caused us presently to relapse into silence, and,
picking up my newspaper, I tried to read. My thoughts were too deeply
engrossed, however, to allow me to focus my attention on the printed
page. Could it really be possible, was what I kept wondering, that this
smooth-spoken, pleasant-mannered man was actually a criminal? Again
Harold Logan's dying eyes stared into mine; again I saw him struggling
to speak; again I heard those ominous words, almost the last words he
had spoken before his spirit had passed into Eternity:

"Hugesson Gastrell--don't forget that name, Sir Roland. You may some day
be glad I told it to you."

I shuddered. Then I remembered Preston's warning and the part I had to
play. Up to the present, Gastrell suspected nothing--of that I felt
positive; but let the least suspicion creep into his brain that I was
not the man he believed he had been speaking to--

Instantly I pulled myself together. For Dulcie's sake even more than for
my own I must exercise the utmost care. Her life as well as mine might
depend upon the skill and tact I must exercise during the next few
hours, possibly during the next few days. I felt I would at that moment
have given much to be able to look into the future and know for certain
what was going to happen to me, and, most of all, to Dulcie, before I
returned to England.

Well it was for my peace of mind that that wish could not be gratified.

On board the boat, rather to my surprise in view of what had happened
and of what Gastrell had just said to me, I saw nothing of Gastrell or
of any of his companions, including Preston. Apparently one and all must
have gone to their cabins immediately upon coming on board.

It was a perfect night in the Channel. Stars and moon shone brightly,
and a streak of light stretched away across the smooth water until it
touched the sky Hue far out in the darkness. For a long time I stood on
deck, abaft the funnel, smoking a cigar, and thinking deeply. I had
turned for a moment, for no particular reason, when I thought I saw a
shadow pass across the deck, then vanish. I saw it again; and then
again. Stepping away from where I stood, hidden by a life-boat, I
distinctly discerned three figures moving noiselessly along the deck,
going from me. Curiosity prompted me to follow them, and to my surprise
I saw them disappear one after another down the hatchway leading to the
steerage. As they must, I felt certain, have come out through the saloon
door, this rather puzzled me.

It was past midnight when, at last, I went below. The saloon,
smoking-room and alleyways were deserted and almost in darkness. No
sound of any sort was audible but the rhythmic throbbing of the
engines. The boat still travelled without the slightest motion.

Hark!

I stopped abruptly, for I had heard a sound--it had sounded like a gasp.
Hardly breathing, I listened intently. Again I heard it--this time more
faintly. It had seemed to come from a cabin on my left, a little
further forward.

I stood quite still in the alleyway for several minutes. Then, hearing
nothing more, I went on to my own cabin.

But somehow, try as I would, I could not get to sleep. For hours I lay
wide awake upon my bunk. What had caused that curious sound, I kept
wondering, though I tried to put the thought from me. And who had those
men been, those three silent figures passing like spectres along the
deck, and what had they been doing, and why had they gone down into
the steerage?

I suppose I must at last have fallen asleep, for when I opened my eyes
the sea had risen a good deal, and the boat was rolling heavily. Pulling
my watch from beneath my pillow, I saw that it was nearly four--we were
due into port at Dieppe before four. The timbers of the ship creaked at
intervals; the door of my cabin rattled; I could hear footsteps on deck
and in the alleyway beside my door.

"Have you heard the dreadful news, sir?" a scared-looking steward said
to me as I made my way towards the companion ladder half an hour
later--I had taken care to adjust my disguise exactly in the way that
Preston had taught me to.

"No--what?" I asked, stopping abruptly.

"A saloon passenger has hanged himself during the night."

"Good God!" I exclaimed. "Who is it?"

"I don't know his name. He was in number thirty-two--alone."

"Thirty-two! Surely that was a cabin in the alleyway where I had heard
the gasp, not far from my own cabin."

"Are you certain it was suicide?" I asked.

"Oh, it was suicide right enough," the steward answered, "and he must
have been hanging there some hours--by a rope. Seems he must have
brought the rope with him, as it don't belong to the boat. He must have
come aboard intending to do it. My mate--he found him not half an hour
ago, and it so scared him that he fainted right off."

"Have you seen the poor fellow? What was he like?"

"Yes. Most amazing thing, sir," the steward continued volubly, "but it
seems he'd disguised himself. He'd got on a wig and false moustache and
whiskers."

All the blood seemed to rush away from my heart. Everything about me was
going round. I have a slight recollection of reeling forward and being
caught by the steward, but of what happened after that, until I found
myself lying on a sofa in the saloon, with the ship's doctor and the
stewardess standing looking down at me. I have not the remotest
recollection.

The boat was rolling and pitching a good deal, and I remember hearing
someone say that we were lying off Dieppe until the sea should to some
extent subside. Then, all at once, a thought came to me which made me
feel sick and faint. While I had been unconscious, had the fact been
discovered that I too was disguised? I looked up with a feeling of
terror, but the expression upon the faces of the ship's doctor and of
the stewardess revealed nothing, and my mind grew more at ease when I
noticed that the few people standing about were strangers to me.

I saw nothing of any member of the group of criminals I now felt
literally afraid to meet until the Paris express was about to start.
More than once I had felt tempted to alter my plans by not going to
Paris, or by returning to England by the next boat. But then Dulcie had
risen into the vision of my imagination and I had felt I could not leave
her alone with such a gang of scoundrels--I might be leaving her to her
fate were I to desert her now. No, I had started upon this dangerous
adventure, and at all costs I must go through with it, even though I no
longer had poor Preston to advise me.

"Ah, Sir Aubrey, we have been looking for you."

I turned sharply, to find at my elbow Connie Stapleton and Doris
Lorrimer. The latter stood beside her friend, calm, subdued; Mrs.
Stapleton was in her usual high spirits, and greeted me with an effusive
hand-shake.

"Hughie told us you were on board," she said, "and he says you are going
to stay at our hotel. I am so pleased. Now, you must dine with us
to-night--no, I won't take a refusal," she added quickly, as I was about
to make some excuse. "We shall be such a cheery party--just the kind of
party I know you love."

There was no way of escape, at any rate for the moment. Later I must see
what could be done. My desire now was to keep, so to speak, in touch
with the gang, and to watch in particular Dulcie's movements, yet to
associate on terms of intimacy with these people as little as possible.
We had not been long in the train, on our way to Paris, when someone--it
was Dulcie who first spoke of it, I think--broached the subject which
had created so much excitement on board--the suicide of the
disguised stranger.

"I wonder if his act had any bearing upon this robbery which is said to
have been committed on board between Newhaven and Dieppe," a man whom I
remembered meeting at Connie Stapleton's dinner party, presently
observed--I suddenly remembered that his name was Wollaston.

"Robbery?" I exclaimed. "I have heard nothing about it. What was stolen?
and who was it stolen from?"

"Well," he answered, "the stories I have heard don't all tally, and one
or two may be exaggerated. But there is no doubt about the robbery of
Lady Fitzgraham's famous diamonds, which I have always heard were worth
anything between thirty and forty thousand pounds. She was coming over
to stay at the Embassy, and had them with her, it seems, in quite a
small dressing-bag. I am told she declares she is positive the stones
were in the bag, which was locked, when she went on board at Newhaven;
yet early this morning they were missing, though the bag was still
locked. The theory is that during the night someone must by some means
have forced an entrance to the cabin--they declare the cabin door was
locked, but of course it can't have been--in which she and her maid
slept, have unlocked the bag and extracted the jewels. Lady Fitzgraham
was travelling alone with her maid, I am told," he ended, "but Sir
Aubrey Belston travelled with her part way from London to Newhaven."

"You are talking to Sir Aubrey at this moment," Connie Stapleton said
quickly. She turned to me: "Sir Aubrey, let me introduce Mr. Wollaston."

"I beg your pardon," Wollaston stammered, "I had no idea--I know you by
name, of course, but I have not before, I believe, had the pleasure of
meeting you. It was Hughie Gastrell, whom I expect you know, who told me
he had seen you in Lady Fitzgraham's compartment on the way to Newhaven.
I suppose Lady Fitzgraham didn't, by any chance, speak to you of her
jewels--say she had them with her, or anything of that kind?"

"She didn't say a word about them," I answered. "Is she on this train?"

"Yes. Gastrell has gone to suggest to her that she should stay with us
at the 'Continental,' and--"

"Sir Aubrey has just decided to stay there," Mrs. Stapleton interrupted,
"and I have proposed that to-night we should all dine together."

Conversation then reverted to the suicide and the robbery, and as Connie
Stapleton's friends who shared the private car entered it, she
introduced them to me. They seemed pleasant people enough, and, as the
subject of conversation did not change, one after another they
propounded ingenious theories to account for the way the robbery might
have been committed. I noticed that they spoke less about the alleged
suicide, and that when the subject was broached they confined their
remarks chiefly to the question of the dead man's disguise, suggesting
reasons which they considered might have prompted him to disguise
himself. They ended by deciding there was no reason to suppose that the
suicide and the robbery had any bearing on each other.

The run from Dieppe to Paris by express takes about three hours, and we
were about half-way through the journey when Wollaston, who had been
absent at least half an hour, re-entered our compartment in
conversation with my recent travelling companion, whom I now knew to be
Lady Fitzgraham. She hardly acknowledged my look of recognition, and out
of the tail of my eye I saw Connie Stapleton glance quickly at each of
us in turn, as though Lady Fitzgraham's unmistakable stiffness
surprised her.

Now the train was running at high speed across the flat, uninteresting
stretch of country which lies about thirty miles south of Rouen.
Presently the Seine came in sight again, and for some miles we ran
parallel with it. We had just rushed through a little wayside station
beyond Mantes, the train oscillating so severely as it rattled over the
points that Dulcie, Connie Stapleton and Lady Fitzgraham became
seriously alarmed, while other occupants of the car glanced
apprehensively out of the windows.

"This car wants coupling up," Gastrell exclaimed suddenly. "At our next
stopping place I'll complain, and get it done."

The words had scarcely passed his lips when the swaying increased
considerably. All at once the brakes were applied with great force, the
train began to slacken speed, and a moment later we knew that we had
left the metals.

To this day it seems to me extraordinary that any of us should have
escaped with our lives. We probably should not have done so had the land
not been on a dead level with the rails at the point where the train
jumped the track. As a result, the cars did not telescope, as is usual
on such occasions, nor did they capsize. Instead, the locomotive dashed
forward over the flat, hard-frozen meadow, dragging the cars behind it,
then came gradually to a standstill owing to the steam having been
shut off.

My first thought as soon as the train had stopped was for Dulcie. As I
crawled along the car--for we had all been flung on to the ground--I
came upon her suddenly. Pale as death, and trembling terribly, she
stared at me with a scared expression, and so great was the wave of
emotion which swept over me at that instant that I all but forgot my
disguise in my wild longing to spring forward and take her in my arms
and comfort her.

"Are you hurt?" I gasped, retaining only with the utmost difficulty the
artificial tone I had adopted from the first, the tone poor Preston had
coached me in until my accents, so he had assured me, exactly resembled
those of Sir Aubrey Belston.

"No--no," came her answer, in a weak voice, "only shaken--but oh, the
thirst this shock has given me is fearful. Is there anything I
can drink?"

I looked about me. On all sides was a litter of hand-baggage that the
accident had hurled pell-mell about the car. Beside me was a large
dressing-bag lying on its side, partly open, the force of the blow as it
was flung up against the woodwork having burst the lock. Thinking there
might be something in it that I could give to Dulcie to relieve her
burning thirst, I set the bag upright, and pulled it wide open.

As my gaze rested upon the contents of that bag, astonishment made me
catch my breath. For the bag was half filled with jewellery of all
descriptions jumbled up as if it had been tossed in anyhow--there had
been no attempt at packing. During the brief moments which elapsed
before I shut the bag, I noticed rings, brooches, bracelets, scarf pins,
watches, hair combs and three large tiaras, all of them, apparently, set
in precious stones--mostly emeralds, rubies and diamonds.

Hastily closing the bag, and fastening the clips to keep it shut, I left
it where I had found it and was about to go in search of water, when the
sight I saw made my heart nearly stop beating.

For at the end of the car, standing motionless, and looking straight at
me, was Alphonse Furneaux! Almost as I returned his dull gaze the truth
seemed to drift into my brain. Furneaux must have escaped from Preston's
house, from the room where Preston had confined him. He must have
discovered that Preston was impersonating him. He must have followed him
from London, followed him on to the boat--

I dared not let my thoughts travel further. Horrible suspicions crowded
in upon me. Could the man standing there staring at me be Preston's
murderer? Was he aware of my identity too, and, if so, had he designs
upon my life as well? Had he told the gang I was now mixed up with of my
disguise, and had they entrapped me in order to wreak vengeance? And
that hoard of jewellery I had so unwittingly discovered--had the man now
standing there before me seen me looking at it?




CHAPTER XXII


THE THIN-FACED STRANGER

I pretended not to notice him as I pushed past him and presently
returned with water. Lady Fitzgraham, Connie Stapleton, and several
others also clamoured for water to moisten their parched lips, and when
I had attended to Dulcie I gave them some. For the next two hours
everything was confusion. All the passengers had been severely shaken,
and some were seriously hurt, but fortunately not one had been killed.
Our extraordinary escape I shall always attribute to the fact that we
travelled in a Pullman, a car that has most wonderful stability.

A large crowd had assembled at Gare St. Lazare to witness the arrival of
the special with the passengers who had travelled in our ill-fated
train. Now that I had collected my scattered thoughts once more I was
resolved at the earliest possible moment to inform Lady Fitzgraham of
the discovery I had made, for I had come to the firm conclusion that
some, at any rate, of the jewellery that bag contained must be hers,
some of the jewellery which had been stolen on board the boat.

Upon our arrival at the "Continental" I discovered that Gastrell and
Connie Stapleton's friends numbered no less than twelve, without
counting Lady Fitzgraham or myself, so that in all we were sixteen. Of
the people I had met before, whom I believed to be members of the gang,
only Jasmine Gastrell was absent. What most puzzled me was what the
reason could be they had all come to Paris. Did the London police
suspect them, and were they fleeing from justice in consequence? That, I
decided, seemed hardly likely. Could they be contemplating some _coup_
on the Continent, or had they come over to prepare with greater security
some fresh gigantic robbery in England? That seemed far more probable,
and just then I remembered that in less than a fortnight the
coming-of-age festivities of Lord Cranmere's son would begin--February
the 28th. What complicated matters to some extent was that I had no
means of ascertaining beyond doubt which members of this large party
were actually members of the gang I now knew to exist, and which, if
any, besides Dulcie, Lady Fitzgraham, and myself, also, I fancied, the
man named Wollaston, were honest folk, some of them possibly dupes. Lady
Fitzgraham I knew well by name and repute, and there could be no
possibility of her being mixed up in criminal or even shady
transactions. That the robbery of her famous jewels, by whomsoever it
had been committed, had been premeditated and carefully planned, there
seemed hardly room to doubt.

Next day all the Paris newspapers contained reports of the suicide--as
they evidently all believed it to have been--and of the robbery on board
the boat. The usual theories, many of them so far-fetched as to be
almost fantastic, were advanced, and all kinds of wild suggestions were
made to account for the dead man's having been disguised. Not until
three days later was the sensational announcement made in the newspapers
that he had proved to be George Preston, the famous English detective,
who had retired upon pension only the year before.

We had been four days in Paris, and nothing in the least suspicious had
occurred. I had been unable to tell Lady Fitzgraham of my suspicions
regarding the whereabouts of her stolen jewels, for she had not dined at
the "Continental," nor had I seen her after our train had reached Paris,
or even on the train after the accident. The hotel manager was under the
impression, I had discovered while conversing with him, that we had all
met by accident either in the train or on the boat, as the accommodation
needed had been telegraphed for from Dieppe. He also was quite
convinced--this I gathered at the same time--that our party consisted of
people of considerable distinction, leaders of London Society, an
impression no doubt strengthened by the almost reckless extravagance of
every member of the party.

The robbery and the supposed suicide on board the boat were beginning to
be less talked about. It was the evening of our fourth day in Paris, and
I had just finished dressing for dinner, when somebody knocked. I called
"Come in," and a man entered. Without speaking he shut the door behind
him, turned the key in the lock, and came across to me.

He was tall and thin, a rather ascetic-looking individual of middle age,
with small, intelligent eyes set far back in his head, bushy brows and a
clean-shaven face--clearly an American. He stood looking at me for a
moment or two, then said:

"Mr. Berrington, I think."

I started, for my make-up was perfect still, and I firmly believed that
none had penetrated my disguise. Before I could answer, the stranger
continued:

"You have no need to be alarmed, Mr. Berrington; I am connected with the
Paris _Surete_, and George Preston was a colleague and an intimate
friend of mine. We had been in communication for some time before his
death, and I knew of his disguise; he had given me details of his line
of action in connection with the people you are with; for he knew that
in impersonating Alphonse Furneaux and associating himself so closely
with this group of criminals he ran a grave risk. Still," he went on,
speaking smoothly and very rapidly, "I believe this tragedy would not
have occurred--for that he was murdered I feel certain, though I have no
proof--had the real Furneaux not succeeded in making good his escape
from the room where Preston had confined him in his own house, a room
where he had more than once kept men under lock and key when he wanted
them out of the way for a while."

As the stranger stopped speaking, he produced from his pocket a card
with a portrait of himself upon it, and the autograph signature of the
Prefect of Police.

"Well," I said, feeling considerably relieved, "what have you come to
see me about?"

"Your life is in danger," he answered bluntly, "in great danger.
Alphonse Furneaux has penetrated your disguise, and I have every reason
to believe that he has betrayed your identity to the rest of the gang.
If that is so, you can hardly escape their vengeance unless you leave
here at once, under my protection, and return to London. Even there you
will need to be extremely careful. Please prepare to come now. It may
already be too late."

"I can't do that," I answered firmly, facing him. "Miss Challoner, the
daughter of Sir Roland Challoner, has unwittingly become mixed up with
these people; she suspects nothing, and as yet I have been unable to
warn her of the grave risk she runs by remaining with them. It is solely
on her account that I am here. I must remain by her at all costs to
protect her--and to warn her as soon as possible."

"You can safely leave that to me, Mr. Berrington," the stranger
answered, with a keen glance. "If you stay here another night I won't be
responsible for your safety--indeed, I don't consider that I am
responsible for it now. Quick, please, pack your things."

"Impossible," I replied doggedly. "You don't understand the situation,
Mr.--"

"Albeury--Victor Albeury."

"You don't understand the situation, Mr. Albeury--I am engaged to be
married to Miss Challoner, and I can't at any cost desert her at such a
time. She has struck up an extraordinary friendship with Mrs. Stapleton,
who is staying in this hotel and is mixed up with the gang, and I want
to watch their movements while retaining my disguise."

"But of what use is your disguise," Albeury cut in quickly, "now that,
as I told you, these scoundrels are aware of your identity, or will be
very soon? You have no idea, Mr. Berrington, of the class of criminal
you have to deal with. These men and women have so much money and are so
presentable and plausible, also so extremely clever, that you would have
the greatest difficulty in inducing any ordinary people to believe they
are not rich folk of good social standing, let alone that they are
criminals. If you insist upon remaining here it will be nothing less
than madness."

"And yet I insist," I said.

The stranger shrugged his shoulders. Then he sat down, asked if he might
light a cigarette, and for a minute or so remained wrapped in thought.

"Supposing that I could induce Miss Challoner to come away," he said
suddenly, "would you come then?"

"Of course I should," I answered. "I have told you it is only because
she is here that I remain here."

Albeury rose abruptly, and tossed his half-smoked cigarette into the
grate.

"Wait here until I return," he said.

He unlocked the door, and went out of the room. I heard his footsteps
grow fainter and fainter as he went along the corridor.

At the end of a quarter of an hour, as he did not return, I went out
into the passage, locked the door of my room behind me, and walked
slowly in the direction Albeury had gone. I knew the number of Dulcie's
room to be eighty-seven--it adjoined the bedroom occupied by Connie
Stapleton, which opened into a private sitting-room; this I had
ascertained from one of the hotel porters. As I reached the door of the
sitting-room I heard voices--a man's voice, and the voices of two women.
The man was Albeury. The women, who both spoke at once, were certainly
Connie Stapleton and Dulcie. They were in the room, and by their tones I
judged them to be wrangling with Albeury. I knocked boldly.

Summoned to enter by Connie Stapleton, I walked straight in and faced
them. At once the wrangling ceased.

There was a look in Connie Stapleton's eyes that I had never seen there
before. Hitherto I had seen only her attractive side. When I had
conversed with her she had always seemed most charming--intelligent,
witty, amusing. Now her eyes had in them a cold, steely glitter.

"What do you want, Michael Berrington?" she asked icily. "Don't you
think it's time you took off that disguise?"

The sound of a little gasp diverted my attention. I turned, and my gaze
met Dulcie's. Her expression betrayed fear.

"Yes, I am Michael Berrington," I said quietly, speaking now in my
natural voice, and looking Connie Stapleton full in the eyes. "As you
have discovered my identity you probably know why I am disguised--just
as you most likely know why George Preston was disguised when you, or
some of your gang, strangled him on board the boat."

Connie Stapleton's eyes seemed gradually to resemble a snake's. Her lips
were tightly closed. Her face was livid. For some moments she stood
there, glaring at me. Then she spoke again:

"This man," she said, indicating Albeury, "has been speaking of you. He
tells me that he has advised you to return to England, and I have told
him it is now too late. You won't see England again, Mr. Berrington--I
tell you that quite openly, before this police officer, whom I have
known for many years. I do so with impunity because he knows that if he
betrays me I can reveal something I know about him--and should do so
at once."

I was about to speak, when my gaze again met Dulcie's. She had turned
suddenly pale. Now she glanced apprehensively first at her friend, then
at me, and then at the American detective Albeury. Deep perplexity as
well as fear was in her eyes.

"Do tell me what it all means," she implored, looking up at me; for the
first time for many days she seemed to need my help. "So many things
have puzzled me during the past days--I have seen so much and heard so
much that I can't understand." She turned to Mrs. Stapleton. "Connie,"
she cried out impetuously, "why have you suddenly changed? Why have you
turned against me? What have I done or said that has given you offence?"

Before Mrs. Stapleton had time to answer, I spoke:

"Dulcie," I exclaimed, "I will say now what I have wanted for days to
tell you, though I have not had a chance of doing so, and I knew that if
I wrote a letter you would show it to this woman, who would invent some
plausible story to make you disbelieve me. Now listen. This woman is not
what you believe her to be. In her presence I tell you that she is an
adventuress of an odious description, and that, in becoming friendly
with you, also in becoming engaged to your father, she has acted from
the basest motives. Dulcie, you must leave her at once, and come
away with me."

I saw an extraordinary look of repugnance creep into Dulcie's eyes as
she cast a half-frightened glance at Connie Stapleton, seated staring at
her with an unconcealed sneer.

"Connie," she said bitterly, "oh, Connie, don't look at me like that!"

The woman laughed.

"Can't you see I have no further use for you, you little fool?" she
retorted harshly. "Go with him--go with your lover, return to your
doddering old father--if you can get to him--who had the amazing
effrontery to ask me to become his wife--I, who am young enough to be
his granddaughter!"

At that instant I caught the sound of a door being closed carefully.
Something prompted me to step out into the passage, and I came face to
face with Gastrell, who had evidently just left Connie Stapleton's other
room and so must have overheard our conversation, also whatever
conversation with Albeury she might have had before I entered. For some
moments we stood looking at each other without speaking. He appeared to
be calm and wholly unconcerned.

"Do you want me for anything?" he asked suddenly.

"No," I answered. "I have been to see Mrs. Stapleton."

"That's rather obvious, as you have this instant left her room. Is there
anything she can do for you?"

"Do for me?"

"Yes."

He came slowly up to me; then, speaking into my face, he said in a hard
undertone:

"You have tried to spy upon us--and failed. Your companion, George
Preston, spied upon us--he is dead. By this time to-morrow--"

Without another word he went past me down the corridor. He turned the
corner at the end, and a moment later I heard the iron gates of the lift
shut with a clatter, and the lift descending.

Just then it was that Dulcie rushed out into the corridor. Catching
sight of me, she sprang forward and clung to me, trembling.

"Oh, Mike! Mike!" she cried piteously, "I am so terrified. I have just
heard such dreadful things--Mike, your life is in danger--you must get
away from here at once!"

"That's what I am going to do," I said, with an assumption of calmness I
was far from feeling. "And you must come with me, my darling. What about
your clothes and things? Can you get them packed quickly?"

Still clinging to me, she hesitated.

"I--I am afraid to go back into that room," she exclaimed at last.
"Connie has suddenly turned upon me--I believe she can't bear me
any more."

"I'm glad to hear that," I answered, intensely relieved at last. Ah, if
only the woman had "turned upon" her long before, I thought, how much
better it would have been for Dulcie.

"But surely," I said, "you can go into your own room to pack your
things."

This proposition evidently troubled her.

"No," she said after an instant's pause. "Doris Lorrimer is in my room."

"And what if she is? She can't prevent your packing your own things?"

"She can, and she will. Oh, Mike," she continued bitterly, "you don't
know--you can't understand. Doris Lorrimer is under Connie's control,
just as I have been. Connie seems to have some extraordinary power over
her. She does everything Connie tells her to, and Connie has told her
not to let me go--to retain my belongings if I attempt to leave."

"But a moment ago Mrs. Stapleton told you to go--she said she had done
with you; I heard her myself."

"She doesn't mean it. I am terrified of her now, Mike; I want to get
away from her, but I daren't. If I go, something awful will happen to
me--I know it will!"

Though I had long suspected it, only now did I realize the fearful hold
that this woman had obtained over Dulcie, who seemed hardly able any
longer to exercise her will. This, I knew, must in a measure be the
result of the woman's having hypnotized her. My mind was made up in
a moment.

"Dulcie," I exclaimed firmly, "you are coming with me to-night--you
understand? To-night--whether you take your things or not is not of
consequence. I'll see to everything. Don't return to your room. Don't
see Mrs. Stapleton again. Come with me--now."

Albeury appeared in the passage. Seeing us, he approached.

"Go at once, Mr. Berrington," he said in a tone of authority. "It is
even more serious than I thought. You haven't a moment to lose."

"I am taking Miss Challoner with me," I replied. "I refuse to leave her
here."

He glanced at each of us in turn.

"Must you?" he said. "Why not leave Miss Challoner to me? I will answer
for her safety. I am too well known in Paris even for reckless people
such as we have to deal with now to attempt to oppose me or to do _me_
an injury."

"Either Miss Challoner comes with me, or I remain," I replied
stubbornly. Something seemed suddenly to have set me on my mettle. "But
how is it, Mr. Albeury," I added quickly, "that if these people know you
are connected with the police, and you know as much about them as you
appear to do, you can't at once have them arrested?"

"We require circumstantial evidence," he answered, "definite evidence of
some kind, which at present we haven't got. In cases such as this we
can't arrest on suspicion. Much of my information about these people
comes from George Preston. People of this description are extremely
difficult to arrest, because, in spite of what is practically known
about them, nothing against them can be proved. That is where their
cleverness comes in--no matter what they do, they keep out of reach of
the law. But come, Mr. Berrington, I must get you away at once--no,
don't return to your room," as I was moving in that direction, "Come
downstairs at once, and bring Miss Challoner with you--we won't go by
the lift, if you don't mind."

Dulcie had an evening wrap over her arm. Taking it from her, I wrapped
it about her shoulders, then slipped on the thin overcoat I had with me.

Quickly we followed Albeury to the end of the corridor. We were about to
descend the stairs, when an unexpected sight arrested our attention.




CHAPTER XXIII


RELATES A QUEER ADVENTURE

Up the great stairway, slowly, very carefully, came four men carrying a
stretcher. The form extended upon it was completely covered by a white
sheet, all but the feet--a man's feet. Behind and on each side were men,
apparently gentlemen, all strangers to me. So deeply occupied were their
thoughts, seemingly, that they appeared not to notice Albeury, Dulcie
and myself as we stepped aside to let them pass. For the moment my
attention was distracted. What had happened? Had there been an accident?
If so, who was the victim, and who were these men with him?

"Can you show me the way to room eight eight?" one of the leading
bearers asked as he came up to me. He stopped, waiting for me to answer,
and as he did so the men beside the stretcher gathered about me, so that
for the instant I lost sight of Dulcie, who had instinctively stepped
back a pace or two.

I indicated the whereabouts of the room.

"And can you tell me which is Mr. Berrington's room?" he then asked.

"Yes. But I am Mr. Berrington. What is it you want?"

"You are? Are you Mr. Michael Berrington?"

"Yes."

"Oh, then you had better come with us now."

"Whom are you carrying? What has happened?"

Without answering he moved onward down the corridor, with the stretcher.

I walked a little way ahead, and at the room numbered eighty-eight, Mrs.
Stapleton's room, I knocked.

Again I was face to face with the woman. Seated in an arm-chair, a
cigarette between her lips, she appeared to be reading a newspaper. Upon
seeing me she rose abruptly; then, as the covered stretcher was borne
slowly in, I saw the cigarette fall from her lips on to the floor, and
with surprised, frightened eyes, she gazed inquiringly at the bearers,
then down at the outline of the figure beneath the sheet.

"Who is it?" she gasped. "Tell me who it is, and why he has been brought
here!"

Nobody answered, though now the bearers, also the men who accompanied
them, had all crowded into the room.

Suddenly I noticed that the door of the room had been shut, and
instantly the thought came to me--

Where was Dulcie? What had become of her? Also where had Albeury gone?

Hardly had the thought flashed into my mind when I was pounced upon from
behind, a hand covered my mouth, my wrists were tied tightly behind me,
and my feet bound with a cord. Now I saw the figure that had lain
beneath the sheet upon the stretcher rise up of its own accord. The
covering fell away, and Gastrell stood before me. I saw him make a sign.
At once a gag was crammed into my mouth with great force, so that I
could neither cry out nor speak. In a few moments I had been lifted by
two men, extended on my back upon the stretcher, and the white cloth had
been thrown over me, covering me completely.

Now, the stretcher being raised, I knew that I was being conveyed along
the corridor. I was being carried down the stairs, slowly, carefully. In
the hall I heard a confused murmur of voices; somebody was telling
someone that "the poor fellow" was more seriously hurt than had at first
been supposed, and that they were taking him to the hospital. Suddenly I
recognized a voice. It was Albeury's, and he spoke in French. Presently
I knew that I was being carried out of the hotel, and down the hotel
steps. I was being lifted into a car. The ends of the stretcher rested
upon the seats. There were expressions of sympathy; questions were being
asked and answered in French; the door of the car was shut quietly, and
the car swept away.

For twenty minutes or more we passed through the streets of Paris,
slowing down at frequent intervals, turning often to right or left.
Gradually the sound of the traffic passing grew less, our speed
increased, and I judged that we must be out in the environs. Now we were
going slowly up a steep hill. We reached the top of it, and our speed
increased considerably.

On and on we sped. We must, I gathered, have travelled well over an
hour, and now be far out in the country. There was no light inside the
car, and though still covered by the sheet, I somehow seemed to feel
that the night was very dark. In what direction had we come?
Whereabouts, outside Paris, was that long hill up which we had travelled
so slowly?

Suddenly someone inside the car moved. An instant later the sheet over
my face was pulled back. In the darkness I could still see nothing, but
I felt that someone was staring down at me. How many occupants the car
contained, of course I could not tell. Still no one spoke, and for five
minutes or more the car tore faster and faster along the straight
country road.

Then, all at once, a light flashed in my eyes--the light of an electric
torch.

"You have but a few minutes to live," a man's voice exclaimed in a low
tone. "If you want to say your prayers, you had better do so now."

The voice was clearly Gastrell's. Now I realized that two men besides
myself were in the closed car. The light from the electric torch still
shone down upon my face. My eyes grew gradually accustomed to the bright
light, which had at first dazzled them.

"This is to be your fate," Gastrell continued a minute later. "At a spot
that we shall presently come to, far out in the country, fifty miles
from Paris, you will be taken out, bound as you are, and shot through
the head. The revolver has your initials on it--look."

He held something before my eyes, in such a way that I could see it
clearly in the disc of light. It was a pistol's grip. On it shone a
little metal plate on which I could distinctly see the engraved
initials--"M.B."

"When you are dead, your wrists and legs will be released, and you will
be left by the roadside in the forest we are now in, the revolver, with
its one discharged chamber, on the ground beside you. Look, whose
handwriting is this?"

A letter was passed into the ring of light. I started, for the writing
was apparently my own, though certainly I had not written the letter. It
was written on notepaper with the Continental Hotel heading, and my
handwriting and signature had been forged--a wonderful facsimile of
both. On the envelope, which was stamped, were written, also apparently
by me, the name and address:

"Miss DULCIE CHALLONER,
  Holt Manor,
    Holt Stacey,
      Berkshire, England."

"My dear Dulcie," the letter ran, "I hope you will forgive the dreadful
act I am about to commit, and forget me as quickly as possible. I am not
insane, though at the inquest the coroner will probably return a verdict
of 'Suicide during temporary insanity.' But my life for years past has
been one continuous lie, and from the first I have deceived you most
shamefully. I asked you to become my wife, yet I am already married, and
have been for some years. Though I am very fond of you, I do not love
you, nor have I ever loved you. The things I have said and hinted about
your friend Mrs. Stapleton were all utterly false; they emanated
entirely from my imagination and were wholly without foundation. This is
all I have to say, except again--forgive me.

"Your sincere and miserable friend,
MICHAEL BERRINGTON."

The letter was undated.

What my feelings were when I had read that letter, I find it impossible
to describe. The fury of indignation that surged up within me as the car
continued to glide smoothly along with unabated speed seemed to drive
from my thoughts the sensation of terror which had at first possessed
me. Death would be awful enough, especially such a death, but that
Dulcie should think I had intentionally and consistently deceived her;
that she should be made to believe I had never loved her and that I had
wantonly taken my life like a common coward, were too fearful to think
about. In an access of mad passion I wildly jerked my wrists again and
again in vain attempts to get free. My mouth was still gagged, or I
should have called loudly in the desperate hope that even in the
deserted spot we were in the cry might be heard and bring assistance.
Oh, those moments of frantic mental torture! To this day I can hardly
bear to think of them.

Gradually I grew calmer. The electric torch had been extinguished and we
still swept on through the darkness. If only the engine would give out,
I kept thinking; if only the car would for some reason break down; if
only an accident of any sort would happen, I might yet escape the
terrible fate awaiting me. To think that a crime such as this could be
committed with impunity; worse still, that my name should be handed down
to posterity dishonoured and disgraced. To be shot like a dog, with arms
and legs bound like a felon's! The more I strove to distract my thoughts
the more my mind dwelt upon the immediate future. What would Sir Roland
think, and Jack Osborne, and all my friends--even old Aunt Hannah? While
pretending to feel pity, how they would inwardly despise me for my
apparent cowardice--that cruel letter, too, it would be printed in the
newspapers. Yet even that I could have borne with fortitude, I thought,
if by some means Dulcie could be made to know that the letter which in a
day or two would be found upon my dead body had not been written by me,
and that I had not taken my life.

The car was slowing down. Presently it stopped. Once more the disc of
light shone down upon my face. Quickly my disguise as Sir Aubrey
Belston, which I still wore--wig, moustache and eyebrows, whiskers and
beard--was removed. Hurriedly my face and neck were rubbed all over with
a sponge soaked in some greasy liquid smelling strongly of turpentine,
then rapidly dried with a cloth. Next, two men raised me off the
stretcher, lifted me out of the car and set me on my feet, propping me
against the car to prevent my falling over, for my legs were still
tightly bound.

Instinctively I glanced about me. We seemed to be in the depths of some
forest. The road we were on was rather narrow. On both sides of it dark
pine trees towered into the sky, which itself was inky, neither moon nor
stars being visible.

A light breeze moaned mournfully up the forest. As I stood there,
unconsciously listening, the sound seemed to chill me. In vain I
strained my ears again in the mad hope that even at this last moment
help of some sort might arrive. To right and left I looked along the
road, but the blackness was as dense as the blackness of the sky above.

The lamps of the car had been extinguished. Now the only light visible
was the glow of the electric torch. For a moment it flashed upon a face,
and on the instant I recognized Gastrell, also a man I knew by sight
though not by name.

So these were my persecutors, two men moving in the best society, and
wholly unsuspected of anything approaching crime. They were to be my
murderers! Even in that moment of crisis I found myself unconsciously
wondering who the driver of the car could be, for obviously he too must
be implicated in this plot, and a member of the gang. Another thought
flashed through my mind. Which of all these criminals had done poor
Churchill to death? Which had assassinated Preston on board the boat,
leaving the impression that he had intentionally hanged himself? Was
Gastrell the assassin? Was--

"Here is a place--beside this tree."

The remark, uttered by the stranger, cut my train of thought. Now
Gastrell stood beside me. In one hand he held the torch. The fingers of
his other hand were unfastening my coat. Soon I felt him push his hand,
with a letter in it, into my inside pocket.

The letter intended for Dulcie! The letter which would besmirch my name,
dishonour and disgrace it for ever!

In a fit of mad frenzy I tugged wildly at my bonds again in frantic
attempts to free myself. As well might I have tried to free myself from
handcuffs. Calmly Gastrell rebuttoned my coat, heedless of my struggles.

"And when you are dead," he said quietly, "Holt Manor and estates, and
the Challoner fortune, will come eventually to my companions and myself,
for Connie, in spite of what she said, is going to marry Roland
Challoner, and I intend to marry Dulcie--if she likes it or if she
doesn't. So now you realize, I hope, when it is too late, how
ill-advised you and your folk were to attempt to overthrow our plans.
Several before you have tried, and all have failed; the majority are
dead. Very likely more will try, and they too will fail. You know the
fate of Churchill and of Preston. You know your own fate. Osborne has
saved himself by becoming one of us, for when he marries Jasmine he will
join us or else--"

He stopped abruptly. A moment later he added:

"Two of your friends we still have to reckon with, though neither counts
for much: Challoner's sister, and his son."

A cold sweat broke out upon me as the ruffian mentioned Dick. God! Was
it possible these fiends would wreak their vengeance on a mere boy? And
yet if they meant to, how could he escape them? How simple for such men
to get him in their power. Ah, if only I could have spoken I should, I
truly believe, have humiliated myself by beseeching the monsters to
spare poor little Dick.

"Come, hurry along," the stranger, who was standing by, exclaimed
impatiently.

"Bob," Gastrell called, without heeding the interruption.

At once the driver of the car approached. He spoke no word. The disc of
light shone upon his face and--"Pull your cap off," Gastrell
said sharply.

The fellow did so. As I stared hard at him, something in his face seemed
familiar to me. Fat and bloated though the face was, and though the eyes
sagged, in the man's expression there was something--

Gastrell turned to me.

"Don't you see the likeness?" he asked quickly.

Gagged as I was, of course I couldn't speak.

"Bob is Sir Roland's brother--Robert Challoner," he said. "At Holt his
name is never spoken, but you have heard of him. Bob Challoner was
kicked out of his home, first by his father, Sir Nelson Challoner, and
afterwards by his own brother, Sir Roland. I will now tell you it was
Bob who suggested the robbery at Holt, and who, with Connie, helped us
through with it. He is going now to see to it that Dulcie becomes
my wife."

"Stop your talk, for God's sake!" the stranger interrupted again, his
patience at an end. "Time is slipping by. Bring him here and
finish him."

They carried me a little way into the forest, then set me on my feet
again, propped against a tree. That I did not feel utterly terrified at
the thought of my approaching death astonished me. After the mental
torture I had endured, however, I felt comparatively calm.

Gastrell approached to within about a yard. Again the wind moaned up
through the forest. No other sound whatever broke the night's stillness.
Once more a disc of light shone straight into my eyes, though now from a
distance of a few inches only. I saw the muzzle of a pistol glitter
above the light--I knew now that the electric torch was connected with
the weapon.

There came a sharp, metallic "click," as Gastrell cocked the hammer.




CHAPTER XXIV


IN STRANGE COMPANY

A load report rang out just behind me. The light before my eyes
vanished. Something lurched up against my chest, knocking the breath out
of me, then collapsed in a heap on to the ground at my feet.

There was an instant's stillness. Now footsteps could be heard crackling
forward through the undergrowth. There came the sound of a heavy blow, a
stifled cry, a dull thud as though a body had fallen heavily. What had
happened? And what was happening? Helplessly I stared about me, striving
in vain to pierce the blackness of the forest. I heard people moving
close beside me, but no word was spoken.

Then suddenly someone touched me. The ropes which bound my wrists were
being severed with a blunt instrument. Now my legs were being released.
Some fragments of rope dropped to the ground. _I was free!_

Nowhere was there any light, and still nobody spoke. Taking me by the
arm, the man who had set me free led me forward through the darkness.
Now we were close to the car. Men were beside it, apparently very busy,
though what they were engaged in doing I could not ascertain. And then,
all at once, the road became flooded with light--the headlights of the
car had been switched on simultaneously.

Almost immediately I saw what was happening. Several large bags had
been placed inside the car, and others were being pushed in after them.
What did they contain? For the moment I was puzzled. Then suddenly the
obvious truth flashed across me. The group of men--I could see them
indistinctly in the darkness--must be poachers, and poaching out of
season I knew to be an offence punishable in France with a very heavy
sentence. There seemed to be five men engaged in handling the sacks,
while a sixth stood looking on.

"_Entrez_" a voice beside me said suddenly. At the same instant I was
gripped by the arm and pushed forward towards the car.

"Who fired that shot?" I exclaimed quickly, in French.

"I did--and saved your life," the man who held me answered. "Why?"

"And you killed him?"

"Yes."

"The report sounded like a rifle shot."

"It was a pistol shot. But what matters, so long as he is dead?"

"Have you his revolver? Did you pick it up?" I asked anxiously.

"Yes."

"Show me both pistols."

My thoughts were travelling with extraordinary rapidity. Rather to my
surprise he handed the pistols to me without a word. Quickly I held them
in the light cast by the car's lamps and hurriedly examined them. Yes,
both were weapons of the same calibre, both took the same cartridges.
Below the barrel of Gastrell's revolver was the small electric lamp from
which the light had shone on to my face. I gripped the pistol tightly
and the light shone out again.

"I will return here in a moment," I said in French, as I moved away, for
the man had released my arm.

With the help of the pistol glow-light I made my way back to the tree
where a few minutes before I had been propped up, helpless. On the
ground, close to the trunk, Gastrell's body lay huddled in a heap, a red
spot in the middle of his forehead showing that death must indeed have
been instantaneous. I had, however, no time for reflection. Quickly I
thrust my hand into the dead man's pockets, one after another. All were
empty--someone must already have gone through them. Glancing about me to
make sure I was not observed, I hastily transferred to the dead man's
pocket, from the inside pocket of my own coat, the letter which he
himself had placed there not ten minutes before. Then I rebuttoned his
coat, picked up the bits of severed rope lying about--the ropes that
previously had bound me--threw the pistol on to the ground close to the
dead man's hand, and turned to retrace my steps. Suddenly I stopped. I
had forgotten something. Picking up the pistol again I fired a shot into
the air, then once more threw it down. My ruse would have proved truly
futile had Gastrell's body been discovered, shot through the head, a
letter in his pocket pointing directly to suicide, and a revolver on the
ground--still loaded in every chamber!

A minute later I was hustled into the car, squeezed tightly between
several men. On the floor of the car were a number of large sacks,
exhaling an odour none too savoury. The door was slammed, I saw a figure
step on to the driving seat, and once more the powerful car shot out
into the night, its search-lamps lighting up the road as far as we
could see.

For a while nobody spoke.

"I don't know who you are," I said at last in French, breaking the
silence, "but I am most grateful to you for saving my life."

Still nobody uttered.

"On my return to England," I continued, "I shall prove my gratitude in a
way you may not expect. Meanwhile, I should like to know if you heard
what happened, what was said, after the car pulled up and I was lifted
out of it."

"We heard everything," one of the men answered in English, out of the
darkness. "The man who shot your enemy is driving this car now."

"And may I ask where we are going?" I said, as the car still tore along
the white, undulating road, scattering the darkness on either side and
far ahead, for we were still deep in the forest.

"Yes. We shall stop first at Chalons-sur-Marne, to deposit these," and
he indicated the sacks, which I had by now discovered contained dead
pheasants, tightly packed.

"And then?"

"You will see."

Later I gathered from them that the police, as well as gamekeepers, were
their deadliest enemies. That night, it seemed, they had been almost
captured by some of the forest keepers, who had succeeded in securing
their car. The car we were in, they told me quite frankly, they intended
to get rid of at once, in a far distant town. That town we were now on
our way to--after leaving Chalons we should not stop until we got there.
The car, they added, had happened to pull up close to where they lay
hidden. Upon discovering that it contained only four men, including the
driver, they had intended to overpower all of us and seize the car.
Then, overhearing some of the conversation, they had decided to pause
and await developments. Owing to that decision it was that my life had
so fortunately been saved.

"And how do you poach the birds?" I asked a little later; as they became
gradually more talkative we began to grow quite friendly.

They laughed.

"It is easily done," one of them answered, and went on to explain that
the method they adopted consisted in burning brimstone under the trees
where the pheasants roosted, the fumes causing the birds to tumble off
their perches and down to the ground.

They further told me that different parts of the forest teemed with
different kinds of game, and that most of it was preserved. In the
section we had just been in, pheasants were most abundant. Poached out
of season they were additionally valuable, being placed in cold storage
directly they were sold, and eventually exported. Equally ingenious were
the methods they employed for poaching other sorts of game--some of
these methods they described to me in detail--and certain dealers in the
town of Chalons, they ended, were always ready to receive it.

At last we passed out of the forest, which I felt glad to leave behind.
Now the road twisted a good deal, also it grew more hilly. The darkness,
however, became gradually less intense. In Chalons we pulled up in a
curious little street. The driver, having clambered down, knocked three
times at a small door. Instantly it was opened; the sacks, one after
another, were handed in, the door shut noiselessly, and once more we
started off.

"Have you any idea," I asked suddenly, "what became of the companions of
the man who meant to kill me?"

"Yes," came the immediate reply. "One of them attacked us, and was
knocked senseless."

"And the other?"

"I can't say. He suddenly disappeared. We emptied the dead man's pockets
to prevent, if possible, his identity being established. You might tell
us who he was, and all about him."

I had already told them a good deal, but now I told them more,
explaining, eventually, how I had come to be with Hugesson Gastrell and
his companion, and the wastrel, Robert Challoner; why they had wished to
murder me; how they had already murdered Churchill and George Preston,
and the reason they had done so. Miscreants of sorts themselves, as I
now knew, they became immensely interested. As we proceeded I told them
of the letter that Gastrell had pushed into my pocket, and how, on the
following day, it would be found in his own pocket.

"So that until I reveal myself," I added, "I shall, after the discovery
of that letter, be dead to my friends and relatives. That, according to
a plan I have now thought out, should facilitate my getting the gang
arrested, if not in France, at any rate in England."

On and on the car sped at the same regular speed. Village after village
was left behind. Now and again we skirted large towns, keeping, however,
well without their boundaries. What departments we travelled through I
had not the least idea. The driver's knowledge of the country was
remarkable. Upon my expressing surprise at the geographical knowledge he
possessed, they told me that at one time he had been chauffeur to a
nobleman who moved about a great deal.

When I pulled out my watch I found it was half-past two.

"I wish you would tell me how much further you are going," I said at
last, yawning. "How many more hours are we going on like this?"

"We are now on our way to Lyons," the man who had last spoken answered
quickly--the cigar that he was lighting cast a red glow in his face. "To
sell the car nearer Paris wouldn't be safe; besides, in Lyons we have a
purchaser awaiting it. We have passed Troyes, Chatillon, and Dijon. We
are now in the Department of Saone-et-Loire."

Again we sank into silence. The soft purring of the car seemed to
increase our drowsiness. Colder and colder the night air grew--in my
evening clothes and thin overcoat I felt it very keenly.

I suppose I must have dozed, for when, presently, I opened my eyes, the
streaks of dawn were visible. My neck and limbs were stiff, and, as I
looked about me dully, I saw that my companions one and all were
fast asleep.

I turned, rubbed the frosted glass in front of me, and peered out at the
driver. There he sat, motionless, almost rigid, his hands still gripping
the wheel, his gaze set straight ahead. That the cold outside must be
intense, I knew, yet he seemed not to notice it.

At a village beyond Louhans we stopped for breakfast, and to cool the
engine; but in less than half an hour we were on the road again. As the
car swiftly passed over one of the bridges in Lyons a church clock was
striking eight. Gradually slackening speed, we turned abruptly to the
right, then began a maze of narrow streets. At last, at a quiet-looking
hotel out on the road to Vienne, we stopped, and I knew that our journey
of three hundred miles or so was at last at an end.

_Cafe-au-lait_ was served for us in a private room on the first floor,
and I was able, for the first time, to scrutinize my companions closely.
Six in all, they certainly looked a dare-devil, reckless lot. To guess
from their appearance what their trade or calling had originally been
seemed impossible. Two of them might certainly have belonged to the
farmer class had the expression in their eyes been less cunning, less
intelligent. The man who had saved my life, and whom I judged to be
their leader, was tall, dark, thick-set, with a heavy beard and
moustache, and dark, deep-set eyes. His voice, full and resonant, was
not unpleasant. Seldom have I seen a man who looked so absolutely
fearless.

It was, I suppose, the confidence they felt that I should not betray
them after what had happened that made them speak so freely before me.
That very morning, I gathered, they would rid themselves of the car to a
big receiver of stolen goods, whose headquarters were in Lyons, the
largest receiver of stolen goods in the whole of Europe, so they said.
With the money thus obtained they would buy a car to replace the one
seized on the previous night; it was interesting to find that these
lordly thieves and poachers found a car essential to enable them to
carry on their business.

The time for parting soon arrived, and once more I thanked my rescuer
and his accomplices for the great service they had rendered me. That a
human life should have been sacrificed was terrible to think of,
and yet--

The reflection that, but for the sacrifice of Gastrell's life, I should
myself have been lying dead, set my mind at ease; and after all, I said
mentally, the death of a man like Gastrell must do more good than harm.

The first thing I did after leaving them was to buy some clothes and
other necessaries, and a valise to pack them in. After that I set out
for a quiet stroll through the quaint old town, which I had never before
visited. Reviewing the situation, as I walked slowly along, and debating
in my mind whether to return to Paris or go straight back to England by
the next boat, various possibilities presented themselves in turn.
Virtually I was dead to all my friends in England, or I should be in a
day or two, when the letter which would be found in Gastrell's pocket
had been printed in the newspapers. That belief, I felt, would help me
to carry out the plan I had formed for discovering at first hand the
actual movements of the gang, some members of which would, I felt sure,
be present at Eldon Hall for the coming-of-age festivities of Lord
Cranmere's eldest son.

Yet what about Dulcie? I felt that I must see her, and see her as soon
as possible. That thought it was which now entirely obsessed me. To see
her meant, of course, that I must at once return to Paris, for almost
for certain she would still be there. True, her last words, uttered in
the corridor of the "Continental," had convinced me that she now
strongly suspected Connie, that she wished to get away from her. But
would she succeed in getting away? Already I had proofs of the woman's
extraordinary will power, and Dulcie, I knew, had been hypnotized by her
more than once. I had doubts of Dulcie's ability to resist the woman's
spell. Obviously, then, my duty lay before me. I must at once return to
Paris. I must see Dulcie again--if possible, see her in private. I must
get her away from that woman and take her back to England, no matter how
great the risk I might have to run. And what, I wondered suddenly, was
Albeury doing all this time?

Still pondering all this, I sauntered into a restaurant I happened to be
passing, ordered a bottle of wine, and asked for a copy of the latest
railway time-table.

The _rapide_ for Paris was due, I saw, to leave Lyons Perrache at eight
that night. That would suit me well, and I at once decided to go by it.
Then, having nothing to do until the time of starting, I once more
strolled out into the town.

A newsboy was shouting the news, and I bought a paper from him. Almost
the first headline upon which my glance rested stirred a recollection in
my mind. Where, before, had I heard that name--"the Duchesse de
Montparnasse"? Ah, now I remembered. When Jack Osborne, confined so
mysteriously in the house in Grafton Street, in London, had been
cross-questioned in the dark, he had been asked various questions
concerning the Duchesse de Montparnasse. And now, right before me, was
an account of a strange robbery, a robbery committed the day before at
the Duchesse's great chateau on the Meuse!

At once I guessed that this robbery must be yet another of the gang's
outrages. My suspicion became conviction when, on reading further, I
learned that it had taken place on the occasion of a great reception,
when the servants at the chateau had been busily engaged. The goods
stolen, the report ended, were valued at many thousands of pounds.

Finding little else of interest in the paper, I continued my ramble.
Glancing at my watch I found it was past six. At that moment it was
that, turning aimlessly into a side street, I came suddenly face to face
with Francois, my rescuer.

"We seem fated to meet!" he exclaimed in his patois French, and he
laughed.

He looked hard at me for some moments; then, as though his mind were
suddenly made up, he said abruptly:

"I wonder, Mr. Berrington--I fancy that by nature you are
inquisitive--if you would like to see something you have never seen
before. I don't believe you fully realize how implicitly I now trust
you. I should like to prove it to you."

"I should like to see it, immensely," I answered, wondering what on
earth, in the nature of a novelty, such a man could have to show me.

"Come," he said in the same tone, linking his arm in mine. "I will show
it to you now. As I say, I have no fear at all that you will betray me,
yet there isn't another living person, excepting my own accomplices, I
would take where I am going to take you now."

Down the side street he had just come up I followed him. We turned to
the right again, then to the left. A little further on he stopped at a
greengrocer's shop, a small, insignificant shop with one window only.

"Wait here," he said as he entered.

A minute later he reappeared and beckoned to me.

"My friend," he said, presenting me to a cadaverous man of middle age,
with a thin, prominent, rather hooked nose, high cheek-bones, and
curious eyes of a steely grey, which bushy eye-brows partly concealed.

The man looked at me keenly, but he neither smiled nor spoke, nor did he
offer to shake hands.

We were now inside the shop. Quickly we passed into an inner room, and
thence to a room beyond it. This room was lined apparently with
bookshelves. Advancing to a corner of it, after carefully locking the
door, the cadaverous man, standing on tiptoe, pressed what appeared to
be a book in the topmost shelf. At once a door in the bookshelves
opened. In silence we followed him through it, and the door shut
noiselessly behind us.

I suppose we had walked ten or twelve yards along the narrow,
low-ceilinged, uncarpeted passage, lit only by the candle lantern that
our guide had unhooked from a nail in the wall, when he suddenly stopped
and bent down. Now I saw that he was lifting the boards, one after
another. A few moments later the upper rungs of a ladder became visible.
Francois descended, I followed carefully--I counted fifteen rungs before
I reached the ground--and the gaunt man came after me, shifting the
boards back into position above his head when he was half-way down
the ladder.

The darkness here was denser than it had been in the passage above, but
the lantern served its purpose. We were in a much narrower passage now,
so low that we had to stoop to make our way along it. The ceiling was
roughly hewn, so was the ground we walked upon. Half a dozen steps along
the rough ground and we stopped again. Facing us was a low, extremely
narrow door, apparently an iron door--it resembled the door of a safe.
Fitting a key into it, the gaunt man pushed it open, and one by one
we entered.

At once I became aware of a singular change in the atmosphere. In the
narrow, cavernous, obviously subterraneous little passage we had just
left the air had been humid, chill, and dank, with an unpleasant earthy
odour. Here it was dry and stuffy, as if heated artificially. So intense
was the blackness that I seemed almost to feel it. There was a dull
thump. Turning, I saw that the cadaverous man had shut this door too.
Just as I was wondering why he took such precautions something clicked
beside me, and the chamber was flooded with light.

For an instant the glare blinded me. Then, as I looked about me, the
sight that met my gaze made me catch my breath. Was this an Aladdin's
Palace I had suddenly entered? Had my brain become deranged, causing a
strange, an amazing hallucination? Or was I asleep and dreaming?




CHAPTER XXV


THE GLITTERING UNDERWORLD

Never shall I forget that astounding spectacle. Even as I think of it
now, it rises once more before me.

The room, though low, was very long and very broad; I guessed at once
that originally it must have been a cellar, or possibly a series of
cellars. Now as the brilliant electric rays from a dozen powerful
ceiling lamps shone down through their tinted shades, they lit up a
collection of treasure such as few indeed can have gazed upon.

Heaped upon trays on tables all about the room were unset precious
stones of every conceivable description, which glittered and
scintillated in the most wonderful way imaginable. Upon the floor, in
rough, uncovered boxes, heaps of gold bracelets and brooches, gold rings
and gold chains, gold ornaments and trinkets, and bits of miscellaneous
jewellery were piled high in inextricable confusion, as though they had
been tossed there to be thrown on to a waste heap. Upon the ground were
bars of gold, the thickness of a brick, ranged carefully in rows. At one
end of the room was a small smelting furnace, not now alight, and above
it an iron brazier. Upon the walls hung sets of furs, many seal-skin and
ermine, while at one side of the room, upon the ground, lay piled up
some thousands of silver spoons and forks, also silver drinking cups
and candlesticks, many silver salvers, and an endless assortment of
silver articles of every kind.

When at last I had recovered from my astonishment, I turned abruptly to
Francois, who stood at my elbow.

"This, I suppose," I said, speaking in a whisper, "is a sort of
clearing-house for stolen property."

He nodded.

"The largest in the whole of France"--he added a moment later, "the
largest, possibly, anywhere in Europe. Stolen goods come here from all
the Continental centres; also from Great Britain, the United States, and
even from Australia."

"But surely," I said, "the police know of this place?"

"They know that it exists, but they don't know where it is. You see how
implicitly I trust you, what faith I place in the honour of--a
gentleman."

"I think not," I corrected. "You know that my tongue is tied--because
you saved my life. That is why you trust me."

He smiled grimly.

"But why have you brought me here?" I asked, after a pause.

"For the reason I have named--to show how implicitly I trust you."

It was only then that a thought flashed in upon me.

"You say," I exclaimed sharply, "that jewellery stolen in Great Britain
sometimes finds its way here?"

"Most of the English stuff is got rid of in this room."

"And are you--do your--your 'clients' tell you where the 'stuff' comes
from?"

"Always," the gaunt man answered. "That is a condition of my taking it
off their hands. You will understand that large rewards are sometimes
offered for the return of property intact and uninjured."

I paused to collect my thoughts before speaking again, anxious not to
make a false step.

"Can you recollect," I said at last, "if jewellery taken from a country
house in Berkshire, England--the house is called Holt Manor--just after
Christmas, ever found its way here?"

The gaunt man reflected for a moment. Then, without speaking, he walked
across the room, unlocked the door of a little safe which was let into
the wall, took from the safe a fat, leather-bound ledger, opened it, and
ran his finger down a page.

"Yes," he said in his deep voice. "The property was valued at about
twelve or fourteen thousand pounds. I have here a list of the articles."

Turning, he peered oddly at me out of his strange eyes.

"May I see the list?" I asked quickly.

"Have you a reason for wanting to see it?"

"Yes. Some of the jewellery taken had been generations in the family. If
it is intact still, I may be able to get a fancy price offered for it,
or for some of it."

"_Bien_" he said. "Much of the stuff has been melted down, but not all."

I read carefully down the list, which, arranged neatly and
systematically, showed at once what had been melted down, and how it had
been disposed of, while a complete list was given of articles kept
intact. Among the latter I recognized several bits of jewellery which
Dulcie had greatly valued, and quickly I arranged with the gaunt man to
buy them from him then and there. After that the three of us sat talking
for a considerable time, and before the time arrived for me to leave I
knew beyond doubt that the jewellery I had caught sight of when Connie
Stapleton's bag had burst open in the train had been the jewellery, or
some of it, stolen on board the boat.

"Some day we may meet again," I said as I parted from Francois and his
companion, in the little greengrocer's shop.

"Some day we shall," the cadaverous man answered in a strange voice. He
extended his hand, and I shook it. A minute later I was in a taxi,
hurrying through the streets of Lyons towards the Perrache station.

As the express sped rapidly towards Paris, endless strange reflections
and conjectures crowded my brain. Was I acting wisely in thus returning
to the French capital, where I might so easily be recognized, seeing how
anxious I was that my friends in England should think me dead? I was--I
knew--though I did not admit it even to myself--returning to Paris
mainly in the hope that I might catch a glimpse of Dulcie. And yet if I
did see her, of what use would it be? Also, what should I do? Let her
recognize me, and the plan I had formed to get the scoundrels arrested
would most likely be spoiled at once--and more than ever I was now
determined to bring them to justice in the end.

I fell into a deep sleep, for I was tired out; I had slept little enough
during that night-long journey in the stolen car. When I awoke, the
train was steaming into Paris; an official, who had aroused me by
rubbing his hand upon my cheek, stood awaiting a _pourboire._

"Go to the Hotel Continental," I said in French to the driver of the
taxi into which I had just stepped with my newly-bought valise. "Get
there as quickly as you can."

That I was doing a mad thing in thus returning to the hotel, where in
all probability the members of the gang were still staying, I knew. But
a man in love hardly reckons with risks, and as I lay back in the taxi,
my brain awhirl, I knew that I was as desperately in love as it is
possible for man to be.

Paris--gay Paris--looked gloomy enough in the dull blue haze which hung
over and partly enveloped its deserted, dreary streets. Happening to
glance up at the windows of a house with green sun-shutters half open,
my eyes met those of a faded girl with touzled hair, peering down into
the street, and mechanically she ogled me. In disgust I averted my gaze,
hating, for the moment, my own sex, which made such women possible. On
and on the car rolled. Some revellers in dishevelled evening clothes,
their eyes round and staring, their faces ghastly in the morning light,
stumbled out beneath an archway above which a lamp burned dully with an
orange glow.

Everything and everyone seemed only half awake. The reception clerk at
the hotel was sulky and inclined to be argumentative. Yes, he was
positive, he said in reply to my inquiry, that nobody of the name of
Challoner was staying at the hotel,--no, nor yet of the name of
Stapleton. They had slept there the night before? Yes, that was quite
possible, but he was not concerned with people who had stayed there,
only with the people who were there then. He had no idea, he added, at
what time they had left, nor yet where they had gone--and did I need a
room, or didn't I? Because if I didn't I had better go away.

His impertinence annoyed me, but I had too much to think about to have
time to lose my temper. I told him I needed a room, and I sent up my
valise. A bath, a shave and a change of clothes braced me considerably,
and by the time I reached the coffee-room I felt thoroughly refreshed.

What adventures had befallen me since I had breakfasted in that room,
only forty-eight hours before, I reflected, as the waiter approached
with the _Figaro_. Breakfast was laid for a hundred or more, but barely
a dozen people were in the room. All were strangers to me, so I soon
became engrossed in the newspaper.

My attention was distracted by the waiter, who, again approaching,
turned up two chairs at my table.

"With all those tables empty," I said to him with a wave of the hand,
"you can surely put people elsewhere. I don't want strangers here."

He smiled pleasantly, showing extraordinarily white teeth.

"A gentleman and lady wish to sit at monsieur's table," he said, bowing
politely, and still smiling.

"Monsieur will not object?"

He seemed so amiable that I felt I couldn't be rude to him.

"But who are the lady and gentleman? And why did they specify this
table?" I asked, puzzled.

The waiter gave a little shrug, raising his eyebrows as he did so.

"How can I tell?" he answered. "They come to the door a moment ago,
while monsieur is reading his newspaper; they see monsieur; they speak
_ensemble_ in whispers for some moments, it would seem about monsieur;
and then they call me and tell me to serve their _dejeuner_ at
monsieur's table."

Hardly had he stopped speaking, when my gaze rested upon two people who
had just entered and were approaching.

One was the police official, Victor Albeury. The other was Dulcie
Challoner!

They greeted me with, I thought, rather exaggerated nonchalance as they
came up, then seated themselves, one on either side of me, Albeury
telling the waiter to "hurry up with the breakfast that he had ordered
five minutes ago."

I was puzzled, rather than surprised, at the matter-of-fact way that
Albeury and Dulcie conversed with me--few things astonished me now. Had
we all been on the best of terms, and met after being separated for half
an hour or so, they could hardly have been more composed. For five
minutes we discussed commonplace topics, when suddenly I noticed that
Albeury was looking at me very hard. Dulcie, too, seemed to have grown
curiously uneasy.

"Whereabouts is he?" Albeury said quickly in a low tone, glancing
sharply at Dulcie. The door was at the back.

"Gone," she whispered. She seemed greatly agitated.

"Mr. Berrington," Albeury said hurriedly, his eyes set on mine, "I
suspect that man. They all left last night. He arrived just before they
left. I happened to see Doris Lorrimer engaged in earnest conversation
with him."

"Of whom are you speaking?" I asked, not understanding.

"Of the waiter at this table--that polite, unctuous man I saw talking
to you. Listen. I have rescued Miss Challoner from Stapleton and her
accomplices. We are going to leave Paris for London in less than half an
hour; it's not safe for Miss Challoner to stay here longer. And you must
travel with us. It is imperative that you should. I can't say more to
you now, while that man is hanging about. Tell me quickly, before he
returns: what happened to you yesterday? Where were you last night?"

"Oh, Mike!" Dulcie interrupted, "if you only knew the mental agony I
have suffered, all that I endured last night--Mike, I dreamed that you
were dead, I dreamed that they had killed you!"

I stared at her, startled.

"They tried to," I almost whispered. "But they failed, and now I--"

"Mr. Berrington," Albeury cut in, "you must forgive my brusqueness--your
breakfast will be brought to you in a moment; when it is, don't eat it.
Make any excuse you like, but don't eat it."

"Good God!" I exclaimed, instantly guessing his thought, "surely you
can't suppose--"

"I can, and do suppose. More than that, I am practically certain that--"

He cut his sentence short, for Dulcie had signalled with her eyes. The
waiter had re-entered the room.

I breathed more freely when at last the three of us were on our way to
the railway station. Strange as it may seem, I had experienced some
difficulty in ridding myself of the officious attentions of the smiling,
smooth-tongued, extremely plausible waiter.

On board the steamer, in a corner of the saloon where none could
eavesdrop, I related to Dulcie how I had been bound, gagged, borne out
of the hotel upon the stretcher concealed beneath a sheet, and all that
had subsequently occurred that I felt justified in telling her. Of the
thieves' clearing-house in Lyons and my rescuer's connection with it,
also of the discovery of the whereabouts of her stolen property, I could
of course say nothing, my lips being in honour sealed.

A little later, as beneath the stars we slowly paced the deck--the sea
was wonderfully smooth for the end of February--Dulcie opened her heart
to me, as I had so long hoped she some day would.

"Oh, if only you knew," she suddenly exclaimed in an access of emotion,
after I had, for a little while, tried to draw her on to talk about
herself, "if only you knew all that I have been through, Mike, you would
be sorry for me!"

"Why don't you tell me everything, my darling?" I answered gently, and,
almost without my knowing it, I drew her closer to me. "You know--you
must know, that I won't repeat to a living soul anything you may say."

"Oh, yes, Mike, of course I know," she said, pressing my hands in hers,
as though she sought protection, "but there is--"

"There is what?"

She glanced to right and left, up the dark deck, and down it, then gave
a little shudder. But for ourselves, the deck was quite deserted.

"I hardly know," she almost whispered, and I felt her trembling
strangely. "Somehow I feel nervous, frightened. I feel as if some danger
were approaching--approaching both of us."

Again she looked about her. Then, as I spoke soothingly, she gradually
grew calmer.

"I was very, very fond of Connie Stapleton, you know," she said
presently, "and I thought that she liked me. That time, at Holt, when
you warned me to beware of her, I felt as if I hated you. She influenced
me so strangely, Mike,--I cannot explain how. Mike, my darling, I tell
you this now because somehow I feel you will forgive me, as at last it's
all over. It seems so odd now to think of it, but as I grew to love her
my love for you seemed to grow less--I knew from the first that she
detested my loving you so, and if I spoke much about you to her it
annoyed her. She wanted to destroy my love for you, Mike, but never, all
the time I have been with her, did I say a word against you. Do you
believe me when I tell you that?"

Later she told me that the woman had quite recently hinted at her doing
certain things she hardly dared to think about, and that, the very day
before, she had disclosed a horrible plan which she had formulated, in
which Dulcie was to play a very important part--a plan to do with a
robbery on a very extensive scale.

"Oh, Mike, Mike," she went on, "I must have been mad during these past
weeks to have listened to what she hinted at--I was mad, or else she had
completely hypnotized me. You remember Mr. Osborne's being taken to that
house in Grafton Street, and kept there in confinement, and the telegram
I received that was supposed to come from you? Well, I know now who it
was who kept him there a prisoner, and came to him in the dark, and
questioned him, and tried to get him to reveal information which he
alone could give. The man who did all that was--"

A footstep just behind us made us both turn quickly. A faint light still
shone along the almost dark deck. Before I could recognize the figure,
before I had time to speak, Dulcie had sprung suddenly forward and
gripped the muffled man by the arm.

"Father!" she exclaimed under her breath, with difficulty controlling
her emotion, "father, what are you doing here?"




CHAPTER XXVI


"THAT WOMAN!"

Sir Roland, whose appearance the cap pulled over his eyes had partly
disguised, made a motion with his hand, enjoining silence. Then, linking
Dulcie's arm in his, he walked slowly towards the saloon entrance. I
walked beside them, but for the moment nobody spoke.

We presently found ourselves in a small, deserted room, apparently a
card room. Here, after carefully shutting the door, Sir Roland seated
himself. Then he indicated the seats that he wished us each to occupy,
for he was rather deaf.

"It is unwise," he said, as he offered me a cigar, "ever to converse
privately on the deck of a steamer. Though I have travelled little by
sea, I know that on board ship, especially on a small boat like this,
voices carry in an extraordinary manner. Standing down wind of you, on
deck, some moments ago, I heard your remarks quite distinctly, in spite
of my deafness. I even recognized your voices--until then I did not know
you were on board."

"But why are you here, father?" Dulcie exclaimed. "When did you leave
England?"

"I crossed the night before last. Connie wired to me to come at
once--she said in her telegram 'most urgent,' though she gave no reason
for the urgency."

"And have you seen her? Where is she now?"

"I was to meet her in the lounge of the Hotel Bristol in Paris last
night. Punctually at nine o'clock, the time arranged, I arrived there. I
waited until nearly ten, and then a messenger arrived with a note. It
was from her. She said in it that she had been telegraphed for to return
to England, that she was leaving by the night boat. She expressed deep
regret, and said she hoped that I would come back to London as soon as
possible--and so here I am."

Again, for some moments, nobody spoke. Dulcie was the first to break the
silence.

"Father," she exclaimed impetuously, "are you really going to--are you
still determined to marry that woman?"

Sir Roland stared at her.

"'That woman'?" he said in surprised indignation. "Whom do you mean by
'that woman'?"

"Connie Stapleton, father," she answered, looking him full in the eyes.
"Have you the least idea who and what she is?"

Sir Roland gazed at her aghast. Then, obviously controlling himself:

"I know that she has done me the honour of accepting my offer of
marriage," he replied, with cold dignity. "More than that, I don't ask
to know; her circumstances don't interest me; my fortune is ample
for both."

Dulcie made a gesture of impatience.

"For goodness' sake, father," she exclaimed, "how can you talk like
that? Connie Stapleton is--"

She turned to me abruptly.

"Oh, Mike," she said in a tone of great vexation, "tell him
everything--I can't."

I cleared my throat to gain time to collect my thoughts. Sir Roland's
rather dull stare was set upon my face inquiringly, though his
expression betrayed astonishment and keen annoyance.

"It's just this, Sir Roland," I said at last, bracing myself to face an
unpleasant task. "You, Dulcie, and I too, have been completely taken in
by Mrs. Stapleton. We believed her to be as charming as she certainly is
beautiful, we thought she was a lady, we--"

"'Thought'!" Sir Roland interrupted, cold with anger. "I still consider
her to be--"

"Will you let me finish? I say we all thought that, I say we supposed
that Mrs. Stapleton was just one of ourselves, a lady, an ordinary
member of society. Then circumstances arose, events occurred which
aroused my suspicions. At first I tried to dispel those suspicions, not
only because I liked the woman personally, but because it seemed almost
incredible that such a woman, mixing with the right people, received
everywhere, could actually be what the circumstances and events I have
hinted at pointed to her being. But at last proof came along that Mrs.
Stapleton was--as she is still--a common adventuress, or rather an
uncommon adventuress, a prominent member of a gang of clever thieves, of
a clique of criminals--"

"Criminals!" Sir Roland stormed, bursting suddenly into passion. Often I
had seen him annoyed, but never until now had I seen him actually in an
ungovernable fury. "How dare you say the lady I am about to marry
is--is--"

"I have proofs, Sir Roland," I cut in as calmly as I could. "You may
doubt my word, you can hardly doubt the word of a famous Continental
detective. He is on board. I will bring him here now."

As I quietly rose to leave the room, I saw Sir Roland staring, half
stupidly, half in a passion still, from Dulcie to me, then back again at
Dulcie. Before he could speak, however, I had left the little room and
gone in search of Victor Albeury. He was not in his cabin, nor was he in
the smoking-room, where men still sat playing cards, nor was he in the
big saloon. On the forward deck I found him at last, a solitary figure
leaning against the stanchion rail, smoking his pipe, and gazing
abstractedly out across the smooth sea, his eyes apparently focussed
upon the black, far-distant horizon.

Gently I tapped him on the arm, as he seemed unaware of my approach.

"Well, Mr. Berrington," he said calmly, without looking round or moving,
"what can I do for you?"

"Please come at once," I exclaimed. "Sir Roland and Miss Challoner are
in the small saloon; we have been trying to explain to Sir Roland that
the woman Stapleton is an adventuress. Probably you don't know that she
is engaged to be married to Sir Roland. He won't believe a word we say.
We want you to come to him--to speak to him and open his eyes."

It was no easy matter, however, to get the old man to believe even
Albeury's calm and convincing assurance that Connie Stapleton belonged
to a gang of infamous people, some of whom we knew beyond question to be
cold-blooded assassins. It was due, indeed, largely to Albeury's
remarkable personality that in the end he succeeded in altering the
opinion Sir Roland had held concerning this woman of whom he was
evidently even more deeply enamoured than we already knew him to be.

"But she has been such a close friend of yours, Dulcie," he said at
last, in an altered tone. "If she is all that you now say she is, how
came you to remain so intimate with her all this time?"

"She has tricked me, father, just as she has hoodwinked you," she
answered, with self-assurance that astonished me. "And then she seemed
somehow to mesmerize me, to cast a sort of spell over me, so that I came
almost to love her, and to do almost everything she suggested. By
degrees she got me in her power, and then she began to make proposals
that alarmed me--and yet I was drawn to her still. Once or twice Mike
had warned me against her, but I had refused to believe his warnings. It
was only two days ago that the crisis came. She didn't ask me to do what
she wanted; she told me I _must_ do it--and then, all at once, the
scales seemed to fall from my eyes. At last her true nature was revealed
to me. It was an awful moment, father--awful!"

Far into the night the three of us remained talking. At last, when we
rose to separate, Albeury turned to me.

"I sleep with you in your cabin to-night, Mr. Berrington," he said
quietly. "And I have arranged that one of the stewardesses shall share
Miss Challoner's cabin. Nobody can tell what secret plans the members of
this gang may have made, and it's not safe, believe me it isn't, for
either of you to spend the night unprotected. Locks, sometimes even
bolts, form no barrier against these people, some of whom are almost
sure to be on board, though I haven't as yet identified any among the
passengers. You will remember that Lady Fitzgraham's cabin was ransacked
last week, though she was in it, and the door locked on the inside. And
poor Preston--we can't risk your sharing his fate."

These ominous warnings would assuredly have filled me with alarm, had
not Albeury's calmness and complete self-possession inspired me with a
strange confidence. Somehow it seemed to me that so long as he was near
no harm could befall either Dulcie or myself. Even Preston's presence
had never inspired such confidence as this clever and far-seeing
detective's presence had done ever since I had come to know him.

But nothing happened. When I woke next morning, after a night of sound
rest, the boat was steaming slowly into port.

Together the four of us journeyed back to town, and for the first time
for many weeks I had an opportunity of a lengthy talk with Dulcie.
Somehow her association with the woman Stapleton seemed to have
broadened her views of life, though in all other respects she was
absolutely unchanged. To me she seemed, if possible, more intensely
attractive and lovable than during the period of our temporary
estrangement--I realized now that we had during those past weeks been to
all intents estranged. Perhaps, after all, the singular adventures she
had experienced--some which she related to me were strange indeed--had
served some good purpose I did not know of. What most astonished me was
that, during those weeks which she had spent in close companionship with
Stapleton, Gastrell, Lorrimer, and other members of the criminal
organization, nothing had, until quite recently, been said that by any
possibility could have led her to suppose that these friends of hers, as
she had deemed them to be, were other than respectable members of
society. Certainly, I reflected as she talked away now with the utmost
candour and unconcern, these people must constitute one of the cleverest
gangs of criminals there had ever been; the bare fact that its members
were able to mix with such impunity in exclusive social circles
proved that.

Before the train left Newhaven I had bought a number of newspapers, but
not until we were half-way to London did it occur to me to look at any
of them. It was not long, then, before I came across an announcement
which, though I had half expected to see it, startled me a little. The
report of my supposed suicide was brief enough, and then came quite a
long account of my uneventful career--uneventful until recently. Turning
to Dulcie, who, seated beside me, was staring out at the flying scenery,
I handed her one of the papers, indicating the paragraph.

"Good heavens, Mike!" she exclaimed when she had read it. "How awful!
Supposing I had read that without knowing it to be untrue!"

She held out the paper to Sir Roland.

"Father, just read that," she said.

He had heard me relate to Dulcie the story of my narrow escape in the
forest near Martin d'Ablois, and I was pleased to see a smile at last
come into his eyes, for since his cruel disillusionment he had looked
terribly depressed.

"After all," I said as he put the paper down, "I am glad I returned to
Paris, if only because my doing so has saved you from this shock."

"If I had read that, believing it to be true," he answered quietly, "the
shock would probably have killed me."

"Killed you!" I exclaimed. "Oh, no, Sir Roland, a little thing like that
would not have killed you; a family like yours takes a lot of
killing--the records in history prove that."

He gazed at me with a strange seriousness for some moments. At last he
spoke.

"Michael," he said, and there was an odd catch in his voice, "I wonder
if you have the remotest conception of the strength of my attachment to
you. I don't believe you have. And yet I could hardly be more attached
to you than I am if you were my own son."

When, after parting from Sir Roland and Dulcie in London--they were to
return to Holt direct--I arrived with Albeury at my flat in South Molton
Street, I found a stack of letters awaiting me, also several telegrams.
Simon, my man, was expecting me--I had telegraphed from Newhaven--but
almost directly he opened the door I noticed a change in his expression,
and to some extent in his manner. Deferential, also curiously reserved,
he had always been, but now there was a "something" in his eyes, a look
which made me think he had something on his mind--something he wished to
say to me but dared not say.

I had sent Albeury into my study to smoke a cigar and drink a glass of
wine while I went up to my room to have a bath. Simon was still busy
with my things when I came out of the bathroom, and, while I dressed, I
took the opportunity of questioning him.

"What's amiss, Simon?" I asked lightly.

He looked up with a start.

"Amiss, sir?" he repeated, with obvious embarrassment.

"I said 'amiss.' Out with it."

He seemed, for some moments, unable to meet my glance. Then suddenly he
faced me unflinchingly.

"Yes?" I said encouragingly, as he did not speak.

"I'll tell you what's amiss, sir," he answered abruptly, forcing himself
to speak. "The day after you'd left, a peculiar-looking man called here,
and asked to see you. When I told him you were not at home, he asked if
you were out of town. I didn't answer that, sir, but I asked him quite
politely if I couldn't give you any message. He answered No, that he
must see you himself. Then he started to question me, in a kind of
roundabout way, about you and your movements, sir."

"I hope you kept your counsel," I exclaimed quickly, for, excellent
servant though Simon, was, he occasionally lacked discretion.

"Indeed I did, sir. Though I was quite courteous, I was a bit short with
him. The next day he come again, about the same time--it was close on
dinner time--and with him this time was another man--a rather younger
man. They questioned me again, sir, quite friendly-like, but they didn't
get much change out of me. Yesterday they tried it on a third time--both
of them come again--and, well, sir, happing to put my hand into my
jacket pocket soon after they were gone, I found these in it."

As he spoke he dived into his jacket, and pulled out an envelope.
Opening the envelope, he withdrew from it what I saw at a glance were
bank-notes. Unfolding them with trembling hands, which made the notes
crackle noisily, he showed me that he had there ten five-pound notes.

"And they gave you those for nothing?" I asked, meaning to be ironical.

"Well, sir, they didn't get anything in return, though they expect
something in return--that's only natural. They said they'd come back
to see me."

"Did they say when they'd come back?"

"To-day, sir, about the same time as they come yesterday and the day
before." He pulled out his watch. "It's close on seven now. Perhaps you
will like to see them if they come presently, sir."

"On the other hand, perhaps I shall not," I said, and I lit a cigarette.
"At the same time, if they call, you can tell me."

"Certainly, sir--if anybody rings, I'll come at once and tell you."

He shuffled for a moment, then added:

"And these notes, sir; am I entitled to keep them?"

"Of course you are. Anybody has a right to accept and keep a gift. At
the same time, I would warn you not to be disappointed if, when you try
to cash them, you find the numbers have been stopped."

Downstairs, with Albeury, I began to look through my correspondence. The
third telegram I opened puzzled me.

"_Is it all right?--Dick."_

It had been awaiting me two days. Guessing that there must be a letter
from Dick which would throw light on this telegram, I glanced quickly
through the pile. I soon came to one addressed in his handwriting.

I had to read it through twice before I fully realized what it all
meant. Then I turned quickly to Albeury.

"Read that," I said, pushing the letter to him across the table.

He picked it up and adjusted his glasses. A few moments later he sprang
suddenly to his feet.

"My God! Mr. Berrington!" he exclaimed, "this is most serious! And it
was written "--he glanced at the date--"eight days ago--the very day
you left London."

"What is to be done?" I said quickly.

"You may well ask," he answered. He looked up at the clock. "The police
must be shown this at once, and, under the circumstances, told
everything that happened in France. I had hoped to be able to entrap the
gang without dealing with Scotland Yard direct."

For some moments he paced the room. Never since I had met him had I seen
him so perturbed--he was at all times singularly calm. I was not,
however, surprised at his anxiety, for it seemed more than likely that
quite unwittingly, and with the best intentions, Dick Challoner had not
merely landed us in a terrible mess, but that he had certainly turned
the tables upon us, leaving Dulcie and myself at the mercy of this
desperate gang. On board the boat I had mentioned Dick to the detective,
and told him about the cypher, and the part that Dick had played. He had
not seemed impressed, as I had expected him to be, and without a doubt
he had not been pleased. All he had said was, I now remembered: "It's a
bad thing to let a boy get meddling with a matter of this kind, Mr.
Berrington"--he had said it in a tone of some annoyance. And now, it
would seem, his view had been the right one. What Dick had done,
according to this letter just received from him, had been to start
advertising in the _Morning Post_ on his own account--in the cypher code
which he had discovered--serious messages intended for the gang and that
must assuredly have been read by them. With his letter two cuttings were
enclosed--his two messages already published. As I looked at them again
a thought flashed across me. Now I knew how it came about that my
impenetrable disguise had been discovered. Now I knew how it came about
that Alphonse Furneaux had been released from the room where Preston had
locked him in his flat. And now I knew why the members of the gang had
left the "Continental" so suddenly, scattering themselves probably in
all directions, and why the woman Stapleton had dashed back to London.

I caught my breath as my train of thought hurried on. Another thought
had struck me. I held my breath! Yes, it must be so. Try as I would I
could not possibly deceive myself.

Dick had unwittingly been responsible for the murder of George Preston!

This was the most awful blow of all. Unconsciously I looked up at the
detective, who still paced the room. Instantly my eyes met his. He may
have read in my eyes the horror that I felt, or the strength of my
feeling may have communicated my thought to him, for at once he stood
still, and, staring straight at me, said in a tone of considerable
emotion:

"That boy has done a fearful thing, Mr. Berrington. He has--"

"Stop! Stop!" I cried, raising my head. "I know what you are going to
say! But you mustn't blame him, Albeury--he did it without
knowing--absolutely without knowing! And only you and I know that he is
to blame. Dick must never know--never. Nobody else must ever know. If
his father ever finds it out, it will kill him."

For some moments Albeury remained quite still. His lip twitched--I had
seen it twitch like that before, when he was deeply moved. At last
he spoke.

"Nobody shall ever know," he said in the same strained tone. He paused,
then:

"I must talk on your telephone," he exclaimed suddenly, turning to leave
the room.

As he did so, Simon entered.

"The two men are here, sir," he said. "I have told them you are quite
alone. Shall I show them in?"




CHAPTER XXVII


THE FOUR FACES

They were quietly dressed, inoffensive-looking men, one a good deal
younger than the other. Judged by their clothes and general appearance
they might have been gentlemen's servants or superior shop-assistants.
Directly they saw that I was not alone, the elder, whose age was fifty
or so, said, in a tense voice:

"We wish to see you alone, Mr. Berrington. Our business is quite
private."

"You can talk openly before this gentleman," I answered, for, at a
glance from me, Albeury had remained in the room. "What do you want to
see me about?"

"In private, please, Mr. Berrington," he repeated doggedly, not heeding
my question.

"Either you speak to me in this gentleman's presence," I answered,
controlling my irritation, "or not at all. What do you want?"

They hesitated for barely an instant, and I thought my firmness had
disconcerted them, when suddenly I saw them exchange a swift glance. The
younger man stepped quickly back to the door, which was close behind
him, and, without turning, locked it. As he did so his companion sprang
to one side with a sharp cry. Albeury had him covered with a revolver.
The younger man had already slipped his hand into his pocket, when I
sprang upon him.

Though some years have passed since I practised ju-jitsu, I have not
forgotten the different holds. In a moment I had his arms locked behind
him--had he attempted to struggle then he must have broken his wrists.
Turning, I saw that Albeury had the other man still at his mercy with
the revolver--not for an instant did he look away from him.

I was about to call loudly to Simon to call the police, when the elder
man spoke.

"Stop!" he gasped, just above a whisper. "You have done us. Give us a
chance to escape and well help you."

"Help me! How?" I said, still gripping my man tightly. "What have you
come for? What did you want?"

"We're under orders--so help me, we are!" he exclaimed huskily. "We had
at any cost to see you."

"And for that you bribed my man, or tried to?"

"Yes--to let us see you alone."

Albeury's arm, extended with the cocked revolver, was as rigid as a
rock. The muzzle covered the man's chest. Again the man glanced swiftly
at the detective, then went on, speaking quickly:

"If you'll let us go, we'll tell everything--anything you want to know!"

I glanced an inquiry at Albeury. Though his gaze was still set upon his
man, he caught my look.

"Right--we'll let you go," he said, without moving, "if you'll tell us
everything. Now speak. Why are you here?"

"We're under orders," the man repeated. "We were not to leave this flat
with him alive in it," he jerked his chin at me. "If we do we shall be
killed ourselves when The Four Faces know. But you've done us. We've
got to escape now somehow, if you'll let us, and our only way is to give
you information that'll help you to get the whole gang arrested. You've
discovered a code we use, and you've tampered with it, and that's
what's done it."

"Done what?"

"Got The Four Faces down on you, and made them set on killing you."

"Whom do you mean by 'The Four Faces'?"

"Why, the men and women--you know them; Gastrell, Stapleton, and the
rest--the gang known as The Four Faces."

"Why are they known as 'The Four Faces'?"

"Because there are four heads, each being known as 'The Fat Face,' 'The
Long Face,' 'The Thin Face,' and 'The Square Face.' And each head has
four others of the gang directly under his or her orders."

"And Gastrell and Stapleton are 'faces'?"

"Yes."

"But Gastrell is dead."

"Dead? Gastrell? Impossible!"

"Yes. Go on."

For some moments astonishment held him dumb.

"Gastrell and the rest of them will be at Eldon Hall, in Northumberland,
the day after to-morrow," he said at last, "for the coming of age of
Cranmere's son. The house is to be looted--cleaned out. Everything is
arranged--the plan is perfect--as all the arrangements of The Four Faces
always are--it can't fail unless--"

"Yes?"

"Now that you know, you can warn Cranmere. You must warn him to be very
careful, for if they get wind there's suspicion about they'll drop it
and you won't catch them. You know the robberies and other things
there've been, and nobody's been caught--they've not even been
suspected. Now's your chance to get them all--the first real chance
there's ever been. But you mustn't show up, mind that. This house is
watched--to see when we come out. Nor you nor your man must go out of
this flat till the gang's been caught, every one of them--it's the day
after to-morrow they'll be at Eldon Hall. They're expecting a gigantic
haul there, including all the Cranmere diamonds--they're worth thousands
on thousands. You're both known by sight, and if you're seen about we're
just as bad as dead."

He stopped abruptly, then went on:

"And you mustn't answer if anybody rings or knocks. And you mustn't
answer the telephone. You understand? Nobody must answer it. It's got to
be supposed you're both in here, dead--you and your man. They've got to
think we done it. There's no one else living in this flat, we
know that."

"I can't warn Lord Cranmere if I don't go out of here."

"He can"--he indicated the detective. "He can go out at any time. They
don't know he's in here. If we'd known you'd anybody with you we'd have
come another time. Your man said you were alone--quite alone, he
said--and, well, we thought the fifty quid had squared him."

Still holding my man tightly in the ju-jitsu grip, I again spoke quickly
to the detective.

"Isn't he lying?" I asked. "Is it safe to let them go?"

"Quite safe," he answered, without an instant's hesitation. "I know them
both. This fellow has been four times in jail--the first time was
seventeen years ago--he got fourteen months for burglary; the second
time was thirteen years ago, for attempted murder, when he got five
years; the third was eleven years ago; the fourth was nine years back.
He's got half a dozen aliases or more, and your man--let me see, yes,
he's been once in jail: ten years for forgery, went in when he was
eighteen and not been out above three years. It's safe to let them
go--quite safe--they've spoken straight this time, couldn't help
themselves."

While Albeury was speaking I had seen the men gasp. They were staring at
him now with a look of abject terror. But still I held my man.

"I don't like to risk it," I expostulated. "The whole tale may be a
plant."

"It's not, Mr. Berrington. I tell you they're straight this time,
they've got to be to save their skins. I could put the 'Yard' on to them
right away--but it wouldn't serve our purpose, the gang would
then escape."

His revolver still covered the elder man's chest.

"Hand out your gun," he said sharply, "and empty out your pockets--both
of you."

Soon everything the men's pockets had contained lay upon the floor.
Among the things were three pistols, two "jemmies," some curious little
bottles, and some queer-looking implements I couldn't guess the use of.
Just then a thought occurred to me.

"But they'd have robbed this flat," I said, "if what they say is true."

"You are mistaken," Albeury answered. "They didn't come for robbery, but
on a more serious errand--to put an end to you. I know the methods of
this gang pretty well, I can assure you. You would have been found dead,
and your man dead too most likely, and the circumstances attending your
death would all have pointed to suicide, or perhaps to accidental death.
But we've not much time to spare. Come."

He turned to the men.

"Come over here, both of you," he said sharply, and signalled to me to
release my man. I did so. To my surprise, both men seemed cowed. In
silence, and without attempt at violence, they followed Albeury across
to the escritoire. At that moment it was that the bell of the flat rang
loudly. Without stirring, we stood expectantly waiting. I had unlocked
the door of the room, and presently Simon entered.

"Mr. Osborne would like to see you, sir," he said in his usual tone of
deference. "When I told him you had visitors he said he wouldn't come
in. He's waiting at the door, sir."

"Jack! Splendid!" I exclaimed. "The very man we want to see--you have
heard me speak of Mr. Osborne, Albeury, and you know plenty about him."
I turned to Simon. "Show him in here at once," I said. "If he still
hesitates, say I want particularly to see him."

It seemed quite a long time since last I had met Osborne--on the night
we had gone together, with poor Preston, to Willow Road, and had
afterwards been followed by Alphonse Furneaux. I had felt so annoyed
with Jack for becoming enamoured of Jasmine Gastrell after all we had
come to know about her that I had felt in no hurry to renew my
friendship with him. But now circumstances had arisen, and things had
changed. If he were still infatuated with the woman, we should, between
the lot of us, I thought, quickly be able to disillusion him.

He looked rather serious as he entered, and glanced from one to another
of us inquiringly. I introduced Albeury to him; as I mentioned
Albeury's name I saw the two scoundrels start. Evidently he was well
known to them by name, and probably by repute.

"As I was passing, I looked in," Osborne said, "as we haven't run across
each other for such a long time, but I don't know that I've got anything
in particular to say to you, and you seem to be engaged."

"But I have something particular to say to you," I answered quickly,
coming at once to the point, as Simon left the room and shut the door
behind him. "You've made pretty much of a fool of yourself with that
Gastrell woman, Jack," I went on, with difficulty restraining the
indignation I felt. "You are largely responsible for terrible things
that have happened during the past few days--including the murder of
George Preston."

"Murder? The newspapers said it was suicide."

"Of course they did--it was arranged that they should. Now listen,
Jack," I continued seriously. "We are on the eve of what may prove to be
a tremendous tragedy, of an event that in any case is going to make an
enormous sensation--nothing less than the capture, or attempted capture,
of the whole of the notorious and dangerous gang that a short time ago
you appeared to be so desperately anxious to bring to justice. These two
men," I indicated them, "belong to the gang in the sense that they are
employed by it; but they have now turned King's evidence."

In a few words I outlined to him exactly what had happened. As I stopped
speaking, Albeury interrupted.

"And if you will now listen, Mr. Osborne," he said, "you will hear a
complete statement of facts which should interest you."

With that he pulled a notebook out of his pocket, opened it, laid it
flat on the escritoire and seated himself, producing his fountain pen.
Both men stood beside him.

Rapidly he cross-questioned them, writing quickly down in shorthand
every word they spoke. Almost endless were the questions he put
concerning the whole gang. One by one the name of each member of it was
entered in the notebook, followed by an address which, the men declared,
would find him--or her. The number of members, we thus discovered,
amounted to over twenty, of whom no less than eight were women. Jasmine
Gastrell's career was described in detail, also Connie Stapleton's,
Doris Lorrimer's, Bob Challoner's, Hugesson Gastrell's, and the careers
of all the rest in addition. The names of some of these were known to
us, but the majority were not. Incidentally we now found out that
Hugesson Gastrell had never been in Australia, nor yet in Tasmania, and
that the story of his having been left a fortune by an uncle was wholly
without foundation. The natural son of well-to-do people in Yorkshire,
he had been launched penniless on the world to make his way as best he
could, and the rapidity with which he had increased his circle of
acquaintance among rich and useful people from the time he had become a
member of the gang had been not the least remarkable feature in his
extraordinary career.

I shall never forget that cross-examination, or the rapidity with which
it was conducted. In the course of a quarter of an hour many mysteries
which had long puzzled us were revealed, many problems solved. The woman
whose stabbed and charred body had been found among the _debris_ of the
house in Maresfield Gardens burnt down on Christmas Eve was, it seemed,
another of Gastrell's victims; he had stabbed her to death, and the
house had been fired with a view to destroying all traces of the crime.
Questioned further, the elder of the two scoundrels went on to state
that he had been in the house in Maresfield Gardens on the night that
Osborne and I had called there, just before Christmas, the night we had
driven up there from Brooks's Club on the pretext of Osborne's having
found at the club a purse which he believed--so he had told the woman
Gastrell--to have been dropped by Hugesson Gastrell. Other members of
the gang had been in the house at the time, the man said,--just before
we entered they had been in the very room into which Jasmine Gastrell
had shown us when she had at last admitted us, which of course accounted
for the dirty tumblers I had noticed on the table, and the chair that
had felt hot when I sat in it. She had first opened the door to us, the
man continued, under the impression that we were additional members of
the gang whom she expected--our rings at the door had accidentally
coincided with the rings these men would have given. Then, at once
discovering her mistake, and recognizing Osborne's voice, she had deemed
it prudent to admit us, thinking thus to allay any suspicion her unusual
reception might otherwise arouse in us.

He told us, too, that the great cobra kept by Gastrell--he had owned it
from the time it was a tiny thing a foot long--had once or twice been
used by him in connection with murders for which he had been
responsible--it was far from being harmless, though Gastrell had
declared to us that night that it couldn't harm anybody if it tried.
Indeed, it seemed that his first intention had been to let it attack us,
for he feared that our having recognized him might arouse our suspicion
and indirectly lead to his arrest, and for that reason he had, while we
were left in darkness in the hall, opened the aperture in the wall
through which it was allowed to pass into the room into which Jasmine
Gastrell had then admitted us. But a little later, deeming that the
crime might be discovered in spite of all the precautions that he would
have taken to conceal it, he had suddenly changed his mind, unlocked the
door, and come to our rescue at the last moment.

The mysterious affair in Grafton Street had been arranged--they went on
to say when threatened by Albeury with arrest if they refused to tell
everything--by Hugesson Gastrell and two accomplices, the two men with
whom Osborne had entered into conversation on the night of Gastrell's
reception in Cumberland Place, and it was a member of the gang, whose
name I had not heard before--the sole occupant of the house at the
time--who had questioned Osborne in the dark. Upon the unexpected
arrival of the police at Grafton Street this man had clambered through a
skylight in the roof, crawled along the roofs of several houses, and
there remained hidden until nightfall, when he had escaped down a
"thieves' ladder," which is made of silk rope and so contrived that upon
the thief's reaching the ground he can detach it from the chimney-stack
to which it has been fastened. Jasmine Gastrell herself it was who had
sent Dulcie the telegram signed with my name, her intention being to
decoy me into the Grafton Street house, where I should have shared
Osborne's unpleasant experience. It was Gastrell who had murdered
Churchill. Who had murdered Preston on board the boat, they declared
they didn't know, nor could they say for certain who had inserted in the
newspaper the cypher messages disentangled by Dick, for Gastrell,
Stapleton, Jasmine Gastrell, and other leaders of the gang were in the
habit of communicating with their crowd of confederates by means of
secret codes. Incidentally they mentioned that Connie Stapleton was in
reality Gastrell's wife, and that Jasmine was his mistress, though
Harold Logan, found in the hiding-hole at Holt, had been madly in
love with her.

"There," I said, turning to Jack Osborne as Albeury ended his
cross-examination, "now you've got it all in black and white. And that's
the woman you've been fooling with and say you're going to marry--not
merely an adventuress, but a criminal who has herself instigated common
burglaries and has connived at and been an accessory to murders! You
must be mad, Jack--stark, staring. For Heaven's sake get over your
absurd infatuation."

"It's not 'infatuation' on my side only, Mike," he answered, with a
curious look that came near to being pathetic. "Jasmine is in love with
me--she really is. It sounds absurd, I know, under the circumstances,
but you know what women are and the extraordinary attachments they
sometimes form--yes, even the worst of them. She's promised to start
afresh, lead a straight life, if only I'll marry her; she has indeed,
and, what's more, she'll do it."

I heard Albeury snort, and even the scoundrels, who had stood by looking
on and listening, grinned.

"In forty-eight hours she'll be arrested and sent to jail," I said
calmly. "Don't be such an utter idiot, Jack!"

He sprang to his feet.

"Jasmine arrested!" he cried. "My God, she shan't be! I'll go to her
now! I'll warn her! I'll--"

"You'll do nothing of the sort," Albeury interrupted. "We've a trap set
for the whole crew, more than twenty of them in all, and if you warn
that woman she'll tell the rest and then--"

"Well, what?"

"Our plan will be defeated--more than that, the whole lot of us in this
room will be murdered as sure as I'm sitting here. You've heard the
truth about this gang from these two men. You know what a desperate
crowd they are; what they'd be like if they get their backs against the
wall you ought to be able to guess. Mr. Osborne, unless you pledge your
solemn word that you'll not warn Jasmine Gastrell, I shall be forced to
retain you here. Mr. Berrington has told you that I am an international
police detective. I have, under the circumstances, the power to
arrest you."

Osborne was evidently terribly upset. For a minute he sat, thinking
deeply. A glance showed how madly in love he obviously was with the
woman. Looking at him, I wondered whether what he had said could by any
possibility be true--that Jasmine Gastrell had really lost her heart to
him. The idea, at first thought, seemed absurd, even grotesque,
and yet--

Suddenly Jack looked up.

"Supposing," he said, speaking with great deliberation, "I pledge my
solemn word that I won't warn her of what you intend to do, or give her
any reason to suspect that such a plot exists, and that I undertake to
take her abroad with me and keep her there for one year from now--I
shall marry her at once--will you undertake that she shall leave the
country unmolested, and be left unmolested?"

I looked inquiringly at Albeury.

"Yes," he said at once. "I agree to that--we both agree to it; that's
so, Mr. Berrington?"

I nodded. A thing I liked about Albeury was that he made up his mind
almost instantly--that he never hesitated a moment.

"All the same, Mr. Osborne," he added quickly, "you must pardon my
saying that I consider you barely sane. It's no business of mine, I
know, but do for God's sake think what you are doing before you bind
yourself for life to such a woman--think of it, _for life!_"

"That's all right," Jack answered quietly. "Don't distress yourself. I
know exactly what I am doing, and--"

He paused, looking hard at Albeury.

"From now onward," he said slowly, "Jasmine Gastrell will be a wholly
different woman. I am going away with her at once, Albeury; to-morrow,
at latest--we may even leave to-night. We shall not return to England
for a year--that I promise you. For a year I shall see neither
Berrington nor you nor any of my friends. But in a year's time you and
Berrington and I, and Jasmine too, will meet again, and then--"

The telephone in the flat rang loudly. Albeury sprang up. An instant
later he was in the hall, preventing Simon from answering the call.
Quickly he returned, while the bell continued ringing.

"What's your code--Morse?" he said sharply to the men.

"No--secret," the elder man answered.

"Quick, then--go; if it's not for you, say so."

Carefully the man Albeury had cross-questioned unhooked the receiver. He
held it to his ear, and an instant later nodded. Then, with the pencil
which hung down by a string, he tapped the transmitter five times, with
measured beat.

Still holding the receiver to his ear, he conversed rapidly, by means of
taps, with his confederates at the other end. From where we stood, close
by, the taps at the other end were faintly audible. For nearly five
minutes this conversation by code continued. Then the man hung up the
receiver and faced us.

"I done it," he said. "Now me and my pal can get away from here at
once--and both of you," indicating Albeury and Osborne. "We shall meet
our pals who've watched this house--we shall meet them in Tottenham
Court Road in half an hour. I've told them we've done out Mr. Berrington
and his man. They think you both dead. It's a deal, then?"

"What's 'a deal'?" I asked.

"That you and your man stick in here until after the gang has been
taken."

"Yes, that's understood."

"And that you won't answer any bell, or knock, nor any telephone, nor
show any sign of life till after they've been took?"

"Of course. That's all arranged."

"Then we'll go, and--and good luck to you."

A few moments later we heard them going down the stairs. At once Albeury
called Osborne and myself into the room we had just left. Then he rang
for Simon.

Everything was quickly settled. Albeury was to go at once to Scotland
Yard and make arrangements for the arrest of the gang at Eldon Hall on
the following day but one; the arrival of the large body of detectives
that would be needed would have, as he explained, to be planned with the
greatest secrecy. After that he would catch the night express to the
north, and, on the following morning, himself call at Eldon Hall to see
Lord Cranmere. He would not alarm him in the least, he said. He would
tell him merely that there were suspicions of a proposed attempted
robbery, and ask leave to station detectives.

"And I'm to stay here with Simon, I suppose," I said despondently,
"until everything is finished."

"Not a bit of it," he answered. "Simon will stay here, and with him a
detective who will arrive to-night at midnight. We may need you at Eldon
Hall, and you must be there."

"Meet you there? But I have promised those men that--besides, supposing
that I am seen."

"As far as those scoundrels are concerned," he answered, "all they care
about is to save their wretched skins. You won't be seen, that I'll
guarantee, but none the less you must be there--it's absolutely
necessary. A closed car will await you at the Bond Street Tube station
at three o'clock to-morrow morning. Ask the driver no questions--he will
have his orders."

Some minutes later Albeury left us. Osborne had already gone. I told
Simon, who had been taken into our confidence, to pack a few necessaries
in a small bag for me, and then, seated alone, smoking a cigar for the
first time since my return, I allowed my thoughts to wander.




CHAPTER XXVIII


THE FACES UNMASKED

Eldon Hall is one of those fine old country mansions so much admired,
and not infrequently coveted by, rich Americans who come over to
"do England."

It was the late Colonel North, of nitrate fame, who, upon visiting
Killeen Castle, in County Meath, with a view to buying the place for his
son, laconically observed: "Yes, it's not a bad old pile, but much too
ramshackle for my son. I could manage to live in it, I dare say, but if
my son buys it he'll pull it down and rebuild it," a remark which
tickled its owner a good deal.

Eldon Hall, in Northumberland, is fully as old and in some respects as
venerable a "pile" as Killeen Castle, though its architecture is wholly
different. Many attempts have been made to fix the date of Eldon--the
property has been in Lord Cranmere's family "from a period," as the
lawyers say, "so far back that the memory of man runneth not to the
contrary"--but experts differ considerably in their opinions.

This is due to the fact that though a portion of the old place is
undoubtedly Elizabethan, there yet are portions obviously of a much
earlier date. According to several authorities the earlier building must
at some period have been in part destroyed, most probably, they say, by
fire, the portion left intact being then deserted for generations, and,
towards the end of the sixteenth century, inhabited again, when, it is
further conjectured, the latter part must have been built. The effect
produced by this architectural medley is bizarre in the extreme, and
many and strange are the local legends and traditions connected with
Eldon Hall.

Situated on the slope of a gigantic ravine, twelve miles from the
nearest town, and eight from the nearest railway station, and the roads
in that part of Northumberland being far from good, until the advent of
the automobile Eldon Hall was looked upon by many as, in a sense,
inaccessible.

The house being far from the beaten track, few excursionists or trippers
came near the place in those days, and, indeed, even to-day the
sightseers who find their way there are for the most part Americans.
From the ridge of hills which shuts in and practically surrounds the
estate--hills all densely wooded--a panoramic and truly glorious view
can be obtained of the wonderfully picturesque scenery that unfolds
itself on all sides. Here, then, it was that, on the 28th day of
February, 1912, many hundreds of people from all parts of the country,
exclusive of local residents and of Lord Cranmere's own tenantry, were
to assemble for a week of festivity and rejoicing which, so rumour said,
would eclipse anything of the kind ever before seen at Eldon, which long
had been famous for its "outbursts" of entertainment.

Lord Cranmere's elder son, who was about to come of age, was like the
typical athletic young Briton. Tall, well-built, handsome, with plenty
of self-assurance and a wholly unaffected manner, he was worthy of his
father's pride. It was no exaggeration to say that everybody, rich and
poor alike, who came into contact with him, at once fell under the spell
of his attractive personality. A popular man himself Lord Cranmere had
always been, but his outlook upon life was somewhat narrow--in spite of
his opportunities he had seen little of life and had few interests
beyond fox-hunting, game-shooting and salmon-fishing. His eldest son, on
the contrary, had, from the age of eighteen, travelled constantly. Twice
already he had been round the world, and so quick was his power of
observation that at twenty-one he knew more of life and of things that
matter than many a man of his class and twice his age.

It was a glorious morning, the sun shining brightly, and strangely warm
for February, as the car in which I had travelled from London with three
companions, all of them Scotland Yard men, pulled up at a farmhouse
within two miles of Eldon. The journey from London, begun at three in
the morning on the previous day, had been broken at Skipton, near
Harrogate, where we had spent the night. Now, as the five of us--for our
driver was also, I discovered, a member of the force--walked briskly
along the narrow, winding lane in the direction of the park which
surrounds Eldon Hall, the morning air was refreshing, also intensely
invigorating.

We looked little enough like London men, and I doubt whether anybody
meeting us would for an instant have supposed that we were not what we
intended that we should look like, namely well-to-do tenantry of Lord
Cranmere's bound for the scene of the coming-of-age festivities. It was
barely nine o'clock, and at eleven the morning's sports were to begin.
Several carts overtook us, loaded with cheery fellows; some of whom
shouted rustic jests as they passed us by, which my companions were
quick to acknowledge. We had walked, I suppose, rather less than a mile,
when we suddenly came to a stile.

"Here's our short cut," the man who walked beside me said, as he stopped
abruptly. "Many's the time I've climbed over this stile more years ago
than I like to think, sir," he remarked lightly. "My father was
under-keeper to his lordship's father, and I've not been back since
twenty years. It's not a bit changed, though, the old place, not a bit,
I'm going, when I retire on my pension, to live down here again. I want
to leave my bones where I was born, and where my father's and mother's
are. It's a fine country, this sir, not a county like it in the whole of
England," he added with enthusiasm. "And you see yonder cross-roads?
That's Clun Cross--there's said to be a highwayman buried at that
cross-roads with a stake pushed through his body."

"Clun Cross." I remembered the name at once. It was the name that had
appeared in one of the advertisements deciphered by Dick.

We made our way up the steep footpath which led across a cramped field.
Now we were on the boundary of a thickly underwooded cover.

"There's not a tree in this wood I don't remember," he said, looking
about him as we scrambled up the bridle path. Bracken up to our waists
was on both sides, and it grew and hung over so thickly that the path
was barely visible. As we reached the top of the track he gave a low
whistle. Instantly the whistle was answered. A moment later half a dozen
men rose up out of the undergrowth.

At the foot of a clump of pine trees in the middle of the wood, we lay
down to confer. Then it was I learned, for the first time, something of
the line of action the police had decided to adopt.

Forty police officers in various disguises, the majority dressed to look
like the tenantry in their holiday clothes, were, it seemed, concealed
in the various covers, in addition to a dozen disguised as labourers,
stationed in fields beside the roads leading to Eldon Hall.

Besides these were fifteen officers, guests to all appearance, who would
arrive with the other guests and mingle with them freely. There were
also eight men disguised as hired waiters, who would help the servants
below stairs in the Hall, and five female detectives assisting the maids
in their work.

"You've got the revolver I gave you?" the gamekeeper's son said, turning
to me suddenly. His name, he had told me, was Ross.

"Yes, though I all but forgot it."

"Let me see it," he said.

I produced it from my pocket, and handed it over.

"I thought so!" he exclaimed. "Not loaded." He loaded it with the
cartridges I gave him, then gave it back to me.

Half an hour passed. One by one the men had risen and wandered away. Now
only three remained. Ten minutes later two more rose and went, leaving
me alone with Ross. His reminiscences of game-keeping--a calling he
seemed still to love--and of the former Lord Cranmere and his relations
and his friends, also his experiences during the eighteen years he had
been in the police force, were interesting to listen to. Brighter and
brighter the sun shone. The weather was almost spring-like and no breath
of wind stirred. Half a mile or so away, in the valley far beneath us,
well-dressed men and women sauntered in the gardens and out upon the
lawns. Larger and larger grew the number of these guests. From varying
distances came the sound of cars rapidly approaching. In the broad, flat
meadow, far down to our right, sports of different sorts were in
progress. Beyond them were swings and similar attractions where children
in their hundreds thronged and clustered. In all directions flew flags
and bunting, while the sharp reports of the shooting-gallery rifles were
audible above the blare of the roundabouts' steam organs.

Ross pulled out his field glass, and, kneeling up in the deep bracken,
focussed the crowds in turn. It was now past noon. From the lawn facing
the house the strains of a Strauss valse, played by an excellent band,
floated up to where we knelt, though the racket of the steam organs
clashed with it to some extent.

Slowly the time crept on. Longer and longer grew the approaching queue
of cars. In one field alone, set aside as a garage, I counted over a
hundred. Others were left out in the stable yards. Others could be seen,
deserted by the roadsides. Beyond the band upon the lawn mammoth
marquees had been erected, in which lunch for the vast concourse would
presently be served. Already servants in their dozens hurried in and out
as they made ready for the feast.

"About the queerest job I've ever had a hand in, this is," Ross observed
presently, lowering his glass. "What do you make of it, Mr. Berrington?"

"Nothing as yet," I answered. "What puzzles me is--why did they want to
bring me here?"

Ross chuckled.

"He's most likely got some reason," he presently murmured. "I don't
suppose Albeury'd fetch you here for your health."

Again he focussed his glass. Now the people were gradually drifting.
Slowly the crowds began to surge in the direction where the tents stood.
Now the tents were filling fast. Once more the band was playing.
Everyone seemed happy. Joy and laughter were in the air. Engrossed in
the panorama which interested me considerably, all thought of my reasons
for being there had for the moment faded from my mind, and--"

"Hark!" Ross exclaimed.

He remained silent, listening.

"What did you hear?" I asked, when half a minute had passed.

"Didn't you hear it?"

"No. What?"

"That buzzing sound. It wasn't a car, I'm certain. I believe it was
a--there, listen!"

I heard it now, distinctly. Away to our right it sounded, high in the
air, apparently; a strange, humming noise.

"An aeroplane?"

He nodded.

Quickly the sound increased in volume. Now we saw that the crowds down
in the valley had heard it. They were gazing up in the sky, away to our
right. Now they were getting excited. Like ants they hurried about. Out
of the tents they swarmed, like bees out of a hive that has been stirred
up with a stick. And now out of the house, too, they came
hurrying--guests, men and maidservants, hired helpers, everybody.

The humming grew louder and louder.

"'Scot! What an idea!"

"Idea?" I exclaimed. "What do you mean?"

"We'd a rumour before leaving town that something unexpected and
startling might occur in connection with this affair. This is it, you
may depend."

Still I was perplexed.

"I don't follow your line of thought," I said. "What can an aeroplane
have to do with the gang, or they with it? They wouldn't come down in an
aeroplane to commit a robbery, surely?"

He looked at me, as I thought, pityingly, as though sorry for my lack of
imagination, or intelligence, or both.

Now everybody was rushing about; all were hurrying in one direction; a
few later stragglers still came stumbling out of the house, running as
fast as their legs would carry them. The humming sounded just above our
heads. Looking up, we suddenly saw the aeroplane.

A large biplane, containing two passengers, it passed not thirty feet
above us, flying horizontally in a straight line. Now it descended a
little way, then slowly began to circle. At that moment we heard a shot,
fired somewhere in the woods.

"Our signal," Ross murmured. "Are you ready to go?"

"Go where?"

"You'll see."

The aeroplane was descending rapidly. Almost immediately beneath it was
gathered a dense crowd. Looking through Ross's glass, I saw one of the
passengers waving to the crowd to clear out of the way. A moment later,
and the biplane was dashing straight at the people beneath.

"Quick! My glass."

I handed it to him. Instantly he levelled it in the direction of the
house.

"See those men?" he said, pointing.

I turned in the direction he was looking. In the main road, just beyond
the house, two men seemed to be busy with a large car. As I looked, a
third man appeared in the roadway, walking quickly towards them. He
stepped into the car behind the one where the two men already were, and,
crouching, was at once lost to sight.

"Come--quickly!" Ross exclaimed. "You see the idea now? That aeroplane
arrival is a ruse to distract everybody's attention. There's never been
an aeroplane up here before. This is the first time most of that crowd,
except the guests, have ever seen one. When we get into the house you'll
find it completely deserted--or apparently so. But some of the gang will
be busy there, that you may depend upon--our men are already there."

With all speed we scrambled through the bracken and down the steep slope
towards the house. In five minutes or less we were within fifty yards of
Eldon Hall.

The back door stood wide open. Entering cautiously, we found ourselves
in the kitchen premises. Kitchen, pantry, every room and the
stone-flagged passages were deserted. A moment or two later we pushed
open a spring door, to find ourselves in the hall. Nobody was there
either, and the front door stood ajar.

"Off with your boots--quick!"

A glance into the various downstair rooms, all of which were deserted,
then up the front stairs we crept in our stockinged feet. On the landing
two men stepped noiselessly out of a doorway. Both, I saw, were
detectives in rubber shoes.

"You know the men of the gang by sight?" one of them whispered, as he
stood beside me.

"Some of them," I answered.

"And they know who you are, we understand."

"Yes."

"Then if you meet one--shoot! He'll shoot you if you don't shoot first."

My hand trembled with excitement as I clutched the pistol in my pocket.
My mouth was dry. I could hear my heart thumping. Cautiously I followed
Ross along the corridor.

Suddenly a loud report almost deafened me. At the same instant Ross fell
forward on to his face, with a hideous crash--I can hear it now as I
think of it. A moment later a man dashed past me, and tore furiously
down the stairs. Springing after him I fired wildly as he
ran--once--twice. I had missed him and he was gone. In one of the rooms
I could distinctly hear sounds of a scuffle. There were blows, some
oaths and a muffled groan. Now the house was suddenly in uproar. The
deafening sound of several shots echoed along the corridors. Two men
were running towards me. Wildly I flung out my arm, the revolver in my
hand aimed point blank at one of them, and then--

Something struck me from behind, a fearful blow, and, stumbling, I lost
consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was in a room, almost in darkness. Like shadows two figures moved
noiselessly about. They were figures I didn't recognize. My head ached
fearfully. Where was I? What had happened? I remember groaning feebly,
and seeing the two figures quickly turn towards me.

Again all was blank.




CONCLUSION

It was broad daylight now, but the blinds were all pulled down. I was in
the same room; my head felt on fire. Never had I suffered so terribly.
Never, I hope and trust, shall I suffer so again. A woman beside the bed
gently held my wrist--a nurse.

Something soothing was passed between my lips. It relieved me. I felt
better.

Many days passed before I became convalescent--dark days of nightmare,
hideous days of pain. A month elapsed before I was allowed to ask
questions concerning that awful day and all that had taken place.

Three of the detectives had been shot dead--poor Ross had been the first
victim. Five had been seriously wounded. Several others had been
injured. But the entire gang of The Four Faces had finally been
captured. Some had been arrested in the house, red-handed; among these
were Connie Stapleton and Doris Lorrimer--guests at Eldon for the week,
they had been discovered in Mrs. Stapleton's bedroom in the act of
packing into a bag jewellery belonging to Lord and Lady Cranmere. Others
had been run down in the woods. Several had been arrested on suspicion
at Clun Cross, and upon them had been found evidence proving their
identity. Six cars had been held up and their occupants taken
into custody.

What upset me most, when all this was told to me, was the news of poor
Ross's death. During the short time I had known him I had taken a strong
liking to him. He had seemed such a thoroughly honest fellow, so
straightforward in every way. He had a wife and several children, he had
told me--several times he had spoken of his wife, to whom he had
evidently been devoted. And he had so looked forward to the time, now
only two years off, when he would have retired on his pension and
returned to his native county--returned to settle down, if possible, on
the Eldon Hall estate. Yet in an instant he had been shot down like a
dog by one of those scoundrels he was helping to arrest. It all seemed
too terrible, too sad. Well, as soon as I was sufficiently recovered to
get about again I would, I decided, visit his widow in London, and see
if I could help her in any way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Six weeks had passed, and I was almost well again. Once more I was
staying at Holt Manor. Already the breath of spring was in the air. Sir
Roland, recovered at last from the mental shock he had sustained, was
there. Aunt Hannah was away, making her annual round of visits. Dulcie
and I were wholly undisturbed, except by little Dick, who was at home
for his Easter holidays.

As we sauntered in the beautiful woods on a sunny afternoon towards the
end of April, discussing our plans for the honeymoon--for we were to be
married in a week's time--Dulcie suddenly asked, apropos of nothing:

"Mike, why did that detective, Albeury, make you go to Eldon Hall? You
were not to take part in the capture. You could quite well have stayed
in London."

"In a way that was a mistake," I answered. "He never intended that I
should go further than the farm two miles from the Hall, where we had
pulled up. He thought he would need me to identify some of the men about
to be arrested, and so he wanted me on the spot. But he had not told me
why he wanted me there, so when the police officers prepared to start
out for Eldon from the farm, naturally I insisted upon going with
them--I wanted to see some of the fun, or what I thought was going to be
an extremely exciting event."

"Which it proved to be," she said seriously.

Just then I remembered something.

"Look, my darling," I said, "what I received this morning."

I drew out of my pocket a letter, and handed it to her. It bore a German
postmark. It had been posted in Alsace-Lorraine.

She unfolded the letter, and slowly read it through.

"How dreadful," she said. "Poor Jack!"

I paused.

"It may not be," I said at last. "All his life he has done odd and
unexpected things, and they have generally turned out well. He has
written to me twice since he left England, and I am convinced, now, that
he and Jasmine Gastrell--or rather Jasmine Osborne--are tremendously in
love with each other. I told you of his idea that she would, when he had
married her, entirely change her life. Perhaps that idea is not as
quixotic as we first thought."

"Perhaps, if they really love each other--" she began, then stopped
abruptly.

"My darling," I murmured, "is there any miracle that love isn't able to
accomplish? Look what you have faced, what I have faced, during these
dreadful months of anxiety and peril. It was love alone that
strengthened us--love alone that held us together in those moments of
terrible crises. Come."

So we turned slowly homeward in the golden light of the spring
afternoon, secure in our love for one another and in the knowledge that
the black shadows which had darkened our lives during the past months
had at last vanished for ever.


THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Four Faces, by William le Queux

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOUR FACES ***

***** This file should be named 9795.txt or 9795.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/9/9795/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charlie Kirschner and PG
Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
